1 
 
 
 
 
Machine Learning for Analyzing Atomic Force Microscopy (AFM) Images 
Generated from Polymer Blends 
 
Aanish Paruchuri 1,Yunfei Wang2, Xiaodan Gu2, Arthi Jayaraman 3,4,5 * 
 
1. Master of Science in Data Science Program, University of Delaware, Newark DE 19713 
2. School of Polymer Science and Engineering, 118 College Drive, #5050 University of Southern 
Mississippi, Hattiesburg, MS 39406 
3. Department of Chemical and Biomolecular Engineering, 150 Academy St, University of Delaware, Newark 
DE 19713 
4. Department of Materials Science and Engineering, University of Delaware, Newark DE 19713 
5. Data Science Institute, University of Delaware, Newark DE, 19713 
 
* Corresponding authors arthij@udel.edu   
  
 
 
 
 
 
 

2 
 
Abstract 
 
In this paper we present a new machine learning (ML) workflow with unsupervised learning techniques to 
identify domains within atomic force microscopy (AFM) images obtained from polymer films. The goal of 
the workflow is to identify the spatial location of the two types of polymer domains with little to no manual 
intervention (Task 1) and calculate the domain size distributions which in turn can help qualify the phase 
separated state of the material as macrophase or microphase ordered/disordered domains (Task 2). We 
briefly review existing approaches used in other fields - computer vision and signal processing – that can 
be applicable for the above tasks that happen frequently in the field of polymer science and engineering. 
We then test these approaches from computer vision and signal processing on the AFM image dataset to 
identify the strengths and limitations of each of these approaches for our first task. For our first domain 
segmentation task, we found that the workflow using discrete Fourier transform (DFT) or discrete cosine 
transform (DCT) with variance statistics as the feature works the best. The popular ResNet50 deep learning 
approach from computer vision field exhibited relatively poorer performance in the domain segmentation 
task for our AFM images as compared to the DFT and DCT based workflows. For the second task, for each 
of 144 input AFM images, we then used an existing porespy python package to calculate the domain size 
distribution from the output of that image from DFT-based workflow.  The information and open-source 
codes we share in this paper can serve as a guide for researchers in the polymer and soft materials fields 
who need ML modeling and workflows for automated analyses of AFM images from polymer samples that 
may have crystalline/amorphous domains, sharp/rough interfaces between domains, or micro or macro- 
phase separated domains. 
 

3 
 
I.Introduction 
Researchers working with macromolecular materials (e.g., block copolymers 1-6, polymer blends 7, 
8, polymer nanocomposites 9-21) rely on various characterization techniques to understand the multiscale 
structural arrangements these soft materials exhibit for various designs (polymer chemistry, architecture, 
molecular mass) and processing conditions (thermal annealing temperature, processing techniques, 
solvents). Unlike crystalline inorganic materials or precisely structured proteins, most synthetic polymers 
and soft materials exhibit a rich diversity of ordered and disordered structure(s) at various length scales, 
and in many cases with dispersity in the structural dimensions. The hierarchy and the distribution of 
structural dimensions together dictate the performance and effectiveness of the material in its eventual 
application or function. To gain an understanding of the structural hierarchy, polymer researchers often turn 
towards one or more microscopy techniques such as scanning electron microscopy (SEM), transmission 
electron microscopy (TEM), scanning transmission electron microscopy (STEM), cryo-TEM, and atomic 
force microscopy (AFM), together with other scattering and spectroscopy tools. The type of data one 
obtains from these microscopy techniques are typically two-dimensional (2D) images that convey the 
intended physical information about the structure of the sample being probed (e.g., chemical differences 
between various regions or domains, shapes and sizes of various domains, orientation of microdomains, 
softness/hardness of the regions, and physical roughness in the form of height maps). Traditionally, these 
images from microscopy measurements are manually interpreted, aided by, in most cases, proprietary 
software packages that are linked to the microscopy instrument. Such manual analyses and interpretation 
are subject to human biases, errors, and subjectivity; one can expect the errors and biases to grow with 
increasing sizes of the datasets and less time spent on analyzing each image. With the recent shift towards 
high-throughput experimentation and characterization and open science, there is a critical need to shift away 
from manual interpretation of the images or manual intervention during computational interpretation with 
proprietary software. Instead, there is a strong justification to move towards fast and objective automated 
open-source computational and machine learning (ML) workflows. Despite the many successes of ML 
workflows for analyses of structural characterization in inorganic and small-molecule organic materials 

4 
 
fields 22-36, the analogous development and use of ML approaches customized for polymers and soft 
materials 37-39 is still relatively less prevalent. In this paper we present one such new ML-based workflow 
for objective interpretation of AFM images from polymer films, with minimum manual intervention.    
For readers less familiar with AFM techniques, we briefly describe AFM technique’s application in the 
context of soft materials and polymers. AFM is used to map the surface topography as well as mechanical 
response (phase image) of soft materials by measuring the spatial variations in interactions between the 
instrument tip and the surface (see perspective article Ref. 40). AFM is an effective tool for detecting 
nanometer-scale 2D morphology of self-assembled polymers which is essential for designing materials for 
specific applications such as high-resolution etch masks, microelectronics, optics, and solar cells. (see for 
example papers on self-assembly of block copolymers in reviews 41, 42) AFM is also utilized to measure the 
thickness and roughness of polymer materials by constructing three-dimensional (3D) mappings. 43, 44 
However, the complexity of surface morphologies—such as diversity of morphologies, dispersity of length 
scales in polymer phase separation, presence of defects, and noise from the instrument makes manual 
analysis of AFM images challenging, subjective, and sometimes inaccurate. Consequently, there is a critical 
need for ML workflows that can automate the analysis of AFM characterization of polymer films. 
In general, ML workflows for polymers/soft materials’ characterization results can be classified as 
being ‘predictive’ or ‘generative’ in nature. While ‘predictive’ ML models project materials properties or 
classify materials based on their structural characterization, ‘generative’ ML models create synthetic forms 
of the characterization data; both of these enable downstream discovery of new materials with desired 
properties. There are many noteworthy studies showing predictive ML models used on AFM images for 
detecting or classifying features of interest 45-48, detecting defects 49, classifying structural information 50, 
and understanding morphology 51. There are also studies showing use of generative ML models for 
increasing resolution 52, 53 and denoising of AFM data 54. Generative models have also been used to convert 
one form of experimental characterization to another form 55-57 to address limited/disparate access to 
instrumentation resources and differences in interpretability of the two forms of characterization. Despite 
the promising solutions enabled by ML models, one major challenge that exists in the training of ML models 
is the need for manual labeling for supervised ML models. Supervised ML models leverage (manually) 

5 
 
labeled data to learn patterns and relationships in the dataset. Manual labeling of experimental data for 
training the ML model is a time-consuming process and not always objective or error-free. To overcome 
the need for manual labeling, researchers have developed self-supervised learning techniques (e.g., see 
reference 58 for how self-supervised learning can be used in microscopy image analysis). Self-supervised 
learning techniques use unlabeled data to learn the pretext of the task without requiring extensive manually 
labeled data; however, this process requires extensive data and some steps in training still require manual 
input. In contrast to supervised and self-supervised ML models, in unsupervised ML approaches 59, 60, the 
model learns the patterns in the data by identifying relationships and organizing data into meaningful groups 
without requiring labeled data. The main challenge one would face with unsupervised learning is to 
formulate the problem in an efficient manner that would enable unsupervised ML algorithms to effectively 
uncover hidden patterns and structures within the data. Unlike supervised learning, where the task is clearly 
defined by labeled examples, unsupervised ML often requires careful engineering of how to represent the 
data.  
Another challenge for training ML models for microscopy image analysis in the field of polymer 
science and engineering is insufficient experimental data for training the model. In many cases, it is not 
viable to have large experimental datasets due to limited availability and access to the instrument or 
insufficient time or limited material availability for sample preparation for the measurement. In such 
situations, one way to generate additional relevant data for training the ML models is through the use of 
synthetic (i.e., simulated) data that has features like a typical experimental measurement data (see for 
example reference 57 where such simulated data was used to train an ML model). One can also use an 
augmented data set combining simulated and experimentally measured data to train ML models. We note 
a particular benefit of most unsupervised ML methods that the dataset size is less of a constraint as 
compared to supervised ML models, making unsupervised ML models more suitable for our task at hand.   
 

6 
 
 
Figure 1: Examples form the dataset of AFM images of thin films of POEGMA-sb-PS spin-cast onto 
silicon wafers. Details of the sample preparation and AFM imaging are presented in section III.  
 
  In this paper we develop an ML workflow with unsupervised learning techniques to identify domains 
within this AFM image dataset obtained from films of supramolecular block copolymers. As 
supramolecular block polymers are formed from association of two types of homopolymers, we expect to 
see morphologies varying from large macro-phase separated (large) domains to ordered/disordered 
bicontinuous microphase separated (smaller) domains. (Figure 1) Through the developed ML workflow 
with unsupervised learning techniques we successfully identify the light and dark polymer domains in the 
input AFM images, and then quantify domain size distributions with little to no manual intervention. Figure 
2 describes the entire workflow. 
 

7 
 
 
Figure 2: Workflow for analyzing AFM images. We first apply machine learning techniques to 
denoised AFM phase images (part a is an example of a PhaseRetrace denoised image) and identify 
the positions of light and dark domains. The output is then two binary images, one for dark domains 
(top of part b) and one for light domains (bottom of part b). After the domains are identified, we use 
existing computational methods for domain size quantification to calculate the domain size 
distribution for light and dark domains (part c).   
 
Prior to showing the reader our developed workflow for identifying domains and quantifying the 
domain sizes, we first review (briefly) existing approaches in other fields - computer vision and signal 
processing – that are applicable for our task which researchers in polymer field frequent need to do during 
material characterization. We test many of these computer vision and signal processing approaches for our 
intended AFM image analysis tasks and through that process identify the strengths and limitations of each 
of these approaches for various AFM image analysis tasks for polymer samples. Even though we 
demonstrate the workflow only on the AFM images from polymer films comprised of blends of two 
associating homopolymers, we believe the information and open-source code we present in this paper 
should serve as a guide to polymer researchers who need ML modeling for analyses of AFM images from 
other polymer samples that may have crystalline/amorphous domains, sharp/rough interfaces between 
domains, or micro or macro- phase separated domains, as long as there is height or phase contrast. 

8 
 
 
II.Computational Methods for AFM Image Analyses 
AFM images consist of a grid of data points that represent height or phase value obtained by the probe 
tip as it scans across the sample surface. This grid of data points in AFM images is similar to a grid of pixels 
in any everyday photo/image we capture, where each pixel in the image holds the light intensity values of 
the object or scene that is photographed. Essentially both the grids represent visually perceivable features 
and characteristics of the scanned surface or scene. Consequently, techniques used for image segmentation 
(defined as outlining object boundaries) and feature extraction in RGB (red, green, and blue) and grayscale 
images 45, 46, 50, 52 can be extended to AFM images. These techniques can elucidate surface texture which in 
turn could be used to distinguish materials’ composition and structural arrangement at certain length scales. 
Texture refers to the visual patterns and structures (i.e., roughness, smoothness, and regularity in patterns). 
Texture analysis tasks involve quantifying patterns and extracting features to identify regions in an image. 
Various computational methods have been developed for texture analysis, including statistics-based 61, 62, 
transform-based63-65, and more recently convolutional neural networks (CNN) 66, 67.  We want to understand 
some of these methods’ strengths and limitations before we test their applicability to our specific task of 
AFM image analysis for polymer films’ domain sizes and shapes (Figure 1 and Figure 2).   
The first category of methods includes wavelet, 68 Fourier, 69 and Radon 70 transforms which the field 
of signal processing relies on heavily. Typically, transforms are applied to convert the information from the 
input domain to a more favorable domain for easier analysis. The relevance of transforms to analysis of 
microscopy images arises from considering images from any microscopy measurement as a two-
dimensional signal that can then be transformed into other easier-to-analyze forms. We describe the 
strengths and limitations of discrete Fourier transform, discrete cosine transform, two variants of discrete 
wavelet transform, and Radon transform in section II.A.  
The second category of models and methods for automated image analysis comes from the field of 
computer vision. For automated image analysis, various ML models have been used to successfully identify 
and understand objects and people in stationary images and movies/videos.71 For example, deep neural 

9 
 
networks (DNN) including U-net67, FastFCN72 and Deeplab73 are used for segmentation tasks in images. 
These models perform well on everyday images (of dogs, cats, furniture, etc.), but perform poorly when 
applied to field-specific (e.g., materials science, biomedical diagnostic) microscopy images. As these 
models are not trained on field-specific data, which for our paper is polymer film AFM images, the 
application of such models as is to analyze these AFM images is not an option. One can take DNN models 
trained on generic everyday objects and re-train a few layers of the neural network model to learn relevant 
features of the field-specific images; this is called transfer learning.74 While transfer learning has been 
successful in many applications75, 76, in most cases of transfer learning the re-training is done in a supervised 
manner with manual labeling, which is subjective and time-consuming. To be able to make an ML model 
plug-and-play for experimentalists, it is important to keep the nature of the solution unsupervised.  Before 
we present the details of and results from unsupervised ML approaches that perform well for our specific 
task of AFM image analysis for polymer films’ domain sizes and shapes, we present a brief review of the 
deep learning and cluster analyses both of which are relevant for our AFM image analyses tasks, in section 
II.B. and II.C, respectively. We also present the key parameters of these models and how to tune them to 
get desired analysis results.  
 
A. Domain transforms  
Table 1: Definitions of common terms used in the context of domain transforms.  
 
Term  
Definition 
 
Pixel 
Smallest unit of image (single point in a grid) which holds 
intensity values. 
  Tile  
Subsection of image on which domain transforms or DNN 
methods are applied to extract features.  
 
Win factor 
A factor that controls the size of tiles. Its defined as the ratio of 
input image size to tile size. Values of win factor lie in the range 
(0,1) where the tile size increases with increase in win factor.  

10 
 
 
Texture 
Visual patterns in an image. 
 
Feature 
Characteristics of data that are used to represent pattern or 
structure in images.  
 
Padding 
A practice of adding extra layers around the image to preserve 
spatial dimensions. 
 
RGB 
A digital image that represents color using red, green, and blue 
channels, where each pixel holds values of these three channels.  
 
Wavelet 
A mathematical function used to decompose data into its 
frequency components.   
 
Natural image 
A photograph or digital image that captures objects from the real 
world (e.g. car, furniture, animals etc.). 
 
Domain transform  
Operations that convert data from one representation to another. 
 
K-means 
Unsupervised ML method that clusters data based on similarity. 
 
Index map 
2D matrix that signifies spatial position of domains. 
 
Domains 
Space or representation of data in which it is analyzed (e.g. time, 
frequency, spatial etc.). 
 
Spatial domain  
Representation of data where values are organized based on their 
spatial position.  
 
Segmentation  
A task of partitioning data in groups of distinct regions.  
 
 
In image analysis, domain transforms play a pivotal role in facilitating the conversion of images from 
spatial domains (in real space) to another domain (e.g., frequency space) which offers a more powerful 
means of extracting meaningful information pertaining to regions of interest from images that may not be 
easily apparent in the original (real space) spatial domain. For instance, in real-space, the AFM images 
contain noise emanating from the sample measurements which is visible along side the useful information. 
As a result,  performing segmentation correctly in the spatial domain with thresholding techniques becomes 

11 
 
a challenge (see examples in Supporting Information Figure S2). In contrast, if we convert the image to 
another domain like the frequency domain, then it  better isolates the frequencies pertaining to noise vs. 
those pertaining to the actual information we wish to  capture.       
To effectively utilize domain transforms for the task at hand, we define a workflow which is a sequence 
of operations executed on input AFM images to identify different domains in it. The workflow takes an 
AFM image as input and gives out two binary images each which signify the location of light and dark 
domains, as illustrated in Figure 2. The operations in a workflow include preprocessing, tiling, domain 
transform, post processing, and clustering described briefly next.  
For preprocessing, we perform denoising and image normalization. Denoising techniques help reduce 
noise inherent in the AFM data and normalization is performed to scale the phase values which are obtained 
in degrees from the AFM experiment to quantize them into a fixed range comparable to natural images (0-
255 intensity scale). See examples of images obtained pre-processing and post-denoising in Supporting 
Information Section S.I. Next, for the tiling stage, we define a region surrounding each pixel in the AFM 
image as a tile. A tile serves as a localized subset of the image, encompassing a neighborhood of pixels 
centered around each pixel. The advantages to analyzing tiles of each pixel in an AFM image are that they 
represent the spatial relationships and patterns within neighboring pixels which allows for the tile to be 
robust to noise and effective in representing the variability in individual pixel values. The size of the 
neighborhood or size of the tile is controlled by the win factor. The tile size is the win-factor multiplied by 
the AFM image size; tile size is a critical parameter as it directly influences the granularity of analysis and 
the level of detail captured within each tile. For more details about how to choose a tile size, we direct the 
reader to Supporting Information Section S.II. Due to the nature of tiles, it is not possible to formulate 
tiles for pixels in the boundary region as there may be no neighboring pixels in a tile. To prevent the loss 
of resolution some common techniques used in CNNs are padding. In padding, additional boundary pixels 
are added to the AFM image to prevent loss of resolution. However, doing so would introduce 
inconsistencies in texture. Therefore, we exclude boundary pixels from analysis in our workflow.  
After generating tiles, domain transforms are applied to the pixel tiles within the AFM image.  Each 
domain transform operates uniquely, resulting in varying output structures and each output structure has a 

12 
 
unique meaning of what it represents. Therefore, the feature extraction from the transforms is specific to 
the transform used. The feature extraction is, in general, guided by how to compress and quantify the 
information from the domain transform output. Such compression is required because the transforms mostly 
output large two-dimensional (2D) matrices which are computationally intensive to work with. Statistical 
metrics like max, mean, variance, skew, and kurtosis of transform outputs, provide a compact representation 
of texture and are representable as low dimensional vectors which are computationally easier to work with. 
In short, the mean, variance, skew, and kurtosis of the transformed tile is used to represent the textural 
information of the pixel’s tile. Collating each of the pixel’s statistics would result in a three-dimensional 
(3D) grid of vectors, replacing the phase value with the calculated transform’s statistics vector in the AFM 
image. We call such 3D grids as a “feature cube” (inspired by the 3D grid shape).  After formulating the 
feature cube, we proceed with post-processing. Since the generated feature cube contains values spanning 
various ranges and scales of the statistical metrics, normalization becomes crucial to standardize the 
analysis, particularly for subsequent clustering processes. The workflow until creating the (normalized) 
final feature cube is illustrated in Figure 3.  
  
Figure 3: Domain transform workflow. The (a) preprocessed AFM phase image is broken down into (b) 
tiles and domain transforms are applied on the (b) tiles. The domain transforms yield transformed 
representation of the tile which are easier for feature extraction. Statistical parameters like mean, variance, 

13 
 
skew, are kurtosis are used to reduce dimensionality and quantify textural features.  These statistics are 
collated into a (c) feature cube which undergoes normalization in post-processing yielding a (d) post 
processed feature cube.    
 
Next, we will discuss the viability of the use of different domain transforms - discrete Fourier, 
discrete cosine, discrete wavelet, and Radon transforms - for our task of identifying phase separated 
polymer domains in AFM images taken from supramolecular block copolymer films. 
 
A.1. Discrete Fourier Transform (DFT) 
The two-dimensional discrete Fourier transform (2D DFT) is a mathematical operation that 
decomposes a two-dimensional image into its constituent sinusoidal waves; effectively the image goes from 
the spatial domain to the frequency domain where the image is represented by the frequency, amplitude, 
and phase information. 77 Mathematically, the 2D DFT of an image f(m, n) with dimensions M×N can be 
expressed as 
𝐹(𝑘, 𝑙) = 1
𝑀𝑁∑∑𝑓(𝑚, 𝑛)𝑒−𝑗2𝜋(𝑘
𝑀𝑚+ 𝑙
𝑁𝑛)
𝑁−1
𝑛=0
𝑀−1
𝑚=0
(1) 
In Equation (1), F(k,l) denotes the transformed image in the frequency domain, while k and l represent the 
spatial frequencies in the vertical and horizontal directions, respectively. The spatial indices m and n 
correspond to the vertical and horizontal coordinates in the original image and j is the imaginary unit.  
The 2D DFT yields a complex 2D matrix where the real part holds amplitude information, and the 
complex part holds the phase information. Recent work 64 has showed that amplitude information from the 
transform contains high potential to capture texture. This is because image texture is often characterized by 
repetitive patterns, which correspond to specific frequency components in the Fourier domain and these 
components are visible in the amplitude matrix. Therefore, applying statistics (mean, variance, skew, and 

14 
 
kurtosis) helps us quantify the texture and provide a low dimensional representation which makes it easy 
for computing similarity or other desired metrics. 
 
A.2. Discrete Cosine Transform (DCT) 
The discrete cosine transform (DCT) is a mathematical operation used in signal processing with 
application to image and video compression. 78 DCT works similar to 2D DFT, where it converts the image 
from the spatial domain to frequency domain but unlike the 2D DFT, DCT decomposes images into 
constituent cosine waves rather than sinusoidal waves. Mathematically, the DCT of an image f(m, n) with 
dimensions M×N can be expressed as:  
𝐹(𝑘, 𝑙) =
2
√𝑀𝑁
∑∑𝑓(𝑚, 𝑛)𝑐𝑜𝑠[(2𝑚+ 1)𝑘𝜋
2𝑀
] 𝑐𝑜𝑠[(2𝑛+ 1)𝑙𝜋
2𝑁
]
𝑁−1
𝑛=0
𝑀−1
𝑚=0
(2) 
In equation (2) F(k,l) denotes the transformed image in the frequency domain, while k and l represent the 
spatial frequencies in the vertical and horizontal directions, respectively. The spatial indices m and n 
correspond to the vertical and horizontal coordinates in the original image. As an imaginary unit is not 
involved in the transform the output of the transform is a real 2D matrix with amplitude and phase 
information. Recent work 79 has shown that the output of the transform has the potential to capture image 
texture information. This is because patterns in texture pose varying frequencies which are pronounced in 
DCT’s output. Therefore, the mean, variance, skew and kurtosis are calculated on the 2D output matrix of 
DCT to capture texture information.  
Both DCT and DFT work on the frequency domain and have similar characteristics of decomposition 
as explained above. Therefore, one could anticipate that the information on texture extracted from the two 
transforms could be similar; our results, as described later, confirm this is the case.  
A.3. Discrete Wavelet Transform (DWT) 

15 
 
Discrete Wavelet Transforms (DWT) are mathematical techniques commonly used in image 
processing and image compression. 80 DWT decomposition works by convolving the image with low-pass 
and high-pass filters, which are specific to a chosen wavelet. Some commonly used wavelets include the 
Haar wavelet, symlets, and Daubechies wavelets, each with unique properties and decomposition 
characteristics.81 For the task at hand, we use Haar wavelets and biorthogonal wavelets. The Haar wavelet 
is simple and efficient, ideal for capturing abrupt changes in an image. On the other hand, biorthogonal 
wavelets excel at detecting finer details and smoother trends. By experimenting with these two distinct 
types of wavelets, we aim to express the capabilities of DWT for texture analysis. DWT works by 
decomposing the image into coefficients of lower and higher frequencies. Lower frequencies are details in 
the image that have smooth variations and higher frequencies are details that have sharp or rapid variations. 
Furthermore, in the high frequencies, coefficients along vertical, horizontal, and diagonal directions of the 
image are captured. All this information is collated in one 2D matrix as illustrated in Figure 4.  
 
Figure 4: Haar wavelet transform applied on the  pre-processed AFM phase image shown in part (a). With 
one level of decomposition we obtain the (lo_1) low frequency coefficient, (hi_vr_1) vertical high frequency, 
(hi_hr_1) horizontal high frequency, and (hi_di_1) diagonal high frequency coefficient which are collated 
into one image in part (a). With decomposition level two, the (lo_1) previous low frequency coefficient from 
part (b) is decomposed further into 4 further sub images and all of them are collated in a similar fashion 
as part (b) yielding, (lo_2) low frequency coefficient, (hi_vr_2) vertical high frequency, (hi_hr_2) 
horizontal high frequency, and (hi_di_2) diagonal high frequency coefficient which are grouped into the 

16 
 
image shown in part (c). Note that the low frequency coefficients in (c) holds minimal detail and is 
approaching a stale state. 
By performing one level of decomposition on an image (Figure 4a) with DWT one yields 4 sub-images 
namely, low frequency coefficient, vertical high frequency, horizontal high frequency, and diagonal high 
frequency (Figure 4b). The size of these sub images is half of that of the input image because of which they 
could be collated as depicted in Figure 4b.  
We note that multiple levels of decomposition could be performed where the low frequency image is 
further decomposed iteratively with DWT. (Figure 4c) The number of iterations in the decomposition 
process is referred to as the level of decomposition. The level of decomposition starts from 1 and goes to a 
value where the low frequency coefficients become stale. For the task at hand a level of decomposition 
more than 3 leads to stale low frequency coefficients. Unlike DFT and DCT, wavelets have complicated 
outputs with subsections in the matrix depicting various frequency coefficients. Therefore, it would be 
counterproductive to apply statistics to the entire output image. Instead, it is more advantageous to apply 
statistics to individual subsections of the output. By doing so, the mean, variance, skew and kurtosis 
quantify and capture the frequency patterns which depict properties of image texture with higher efficiency.   
 
A.4. Radon Transform 
Radon transform is a mathematical technique with extensive applications in medical imaging,82 
computer vision, 83 and hard material science 84.  It is commonly used in computed tomography (CT) scans 
for reconstructing images of human organs. CT scans work by using penetrating waves from different 
angles around the body to obtain projections. It has been shown that Radon transform can be applied to 
images to study image texture. 85 Radon transform works by integrating the intensity values of an image 
in a linear path which yields a vector called a ‘projection’. Projections are taken at angles from 0 degrees 
to 180 degrees, which are then stacked to form a 2D matrix called the ‘sinogram’. An illustration of 
projections and sinogram are presented in Figure 5.  

17 
 
     
 
Figure 5. Radon transform and visualization of sinogram. The transform takes in the pre-processed AFM 
phase image (a) and calculates the integral of intensity values in the image along (dotted arrows) rays 
emanating from a projection angle with the AFM image. The projection angle varies from 0 deg to 180 
deg and the integral of the rays is captured and stacked horizontally to form an image called the sinogram 
(b). 
The sinogram, due to its integral information of intensities at various angles, tends to capture 
orientation and directional features from an image which could be quantified with the help of statistics 
mean, variance, skew, and kurtosis to extract textural features like directionality and regularity. Statistics 
also give a low dimensional representation of the sinogram making it easy for similarity calculations in 
clustering algorithms.             
 
 
 
 
B. Deep Learning (DL) ResNet50 
 
Table 2: Definitions of common terms used in the context of deep learning. 

18 
 
 
Term  
Definition 
 
Feature extraction 
Process of transforming data into a set of more meaningful 
information or features. 
  Convolution 
Mathematical operation used to either extract features or 
filter images.  
 
Filter  
Mathematical operation used on images to suppress or 
enhance desirable components. 
 
Classification 
Task of categorizing input data.  
 
Index map 
2D matrix with indexes (0 or1) which signify presence of 
domain (light or dark). 
 
Transfer learning  
ML technique where knowledge gained from a training task 
is fine tunes to solve another task.  
 
Unsupervised learning  
Category of ML algorithms that extract pattern in data 
without the need of manual supervision.  
 
Deep learning (DL) 
A branch of ML where models contain multiple layers(deep) 
of neural networks. 
 
Feature maps  
Groups a 2D matrices obtained from the output of ResNet50 
network stages.  
 
ResNet50 
A pretrained DL model used for feature extraction.  
 
 
 

19 
 
  
Figure 6: Schematic representation of ResNet50 workflow for domain segmentation till feature cube 
generation. The (a) pre-processed AFM phase image is divided into (b) tiles. The (b) tiles are fed into the 
(c) ResNet50 model which in turn generates feature maps. Statistical parameters - mean, max, and variance 
- are used to reduce the dimensions of the feature maps and these statistics are horizontally stacked in a 
feature vector. Repeating this process for all the tiles and stacking the feature vectors in spatial order, 
results in a (d) feature cube.  
 
Convolutional Neural Networks (CNN) is a deep learning method that is widely regarded as one of 
the most advanced approaches for image texture analysis and prediction. CNNs have multiple convolutional 
layers that are designed to learn and extract features from images. These layers contain multiple learnable 
filters which when convoluted over the input, detect features like patterns, edges, and corners, aggregating 
this information into a feature map. The learnable filters in CNN must be optimized to detect texture. This 
is done by training the model over millions of images with labels where it tries to correctly predict the 
image. CNN model training is supervised and a time and effort intensive process requiring large amounts 
of labeled data which often is not available in the soft materials characterization data. Therefore, if one 
wants to avoid training the CNN models from scratch themselves, they could use a pre-trained network 
which is trained on some task-specific image data or general images dataset and see how applicable that 
model is for their own task. One such pre-trained CNN is ResNet50 which was trained on a large dataset 
of images called ImageNet 86 consisting of 14 million images of various day to day objects; ResNet50 was 
trained to classify images with these objects. Recent work has shown that one could utilize various 
convolutional layers from models trained on ImageNet data to extract features from images. 66 Therefore, 

20 
 
we could leverage ResNet50’s ability to extract textural features from images (tiles in our workflow) and 
substitute domain transform with the ResNet50 model in the workflow. The resulting workflow is illustrated 
in Figure 6.   
ResNet50 consists of multiple sets of convolutional layers where the level of understanding of features 
keeps reducing as we go deeper into the network. For the task at hand, we work with the output of the first 
3 sets of convolutional layers to extract feature maps. The feature maps extracted have different sizes and 
represent textural information. Statistical parameters - mean, max, and variance - are calculated from the 
feature maps and are used to represent feature maps. Effectively this converts the feature map which is a 
2D matrix to a vector of length 3. Grouping these vectors for each feature map gives us a feature vector 
which is collated to form the feature cube. Unlike in domain transform workflows, the feature cube is not 
normalized because CNNs inherently work on normalized data as a result the scale of values in the feature 
cube remains constant. It is important to note that despite the effectiveness of ResNet50, they still have 
limitations, one of which is the minimum input size which is restricted to 32x32 pixels; this restricts the 
granularity of analysis and the ability of the network to capture small scale features.    
   
C. Clustering  
From the domain transforms and deep learning workflow, we typically obtain a three-dimensional 
feature cube. The first and second dimensions of the feature cube denote the spatial position on the raw 
image, while the third dimension contains the feature vector representing the textural information of the 
neighborhood surrounding that spatial coordinate (tile) indicated by the first two dimensions.  
 

21 
 
 
Figure 7:   Schematics of clustering. Domain transforms or deep learning workflows operate on (a) pre-
processed AFM phase images to generate the (b) post-processed feature cube. Subsequently, the K-means 
clustering algorithm is applied on the post-processed feature cube to predict two distinct clusters. The 
resulting output from clustering is a (c) 2D image wherein each point is the index of a domain. 
 
An approach commonly used to classify regions from the feature vector involves training a supervised 
ML model. 45, 46, 66 However, supervised ML models need manual labeling of data for training the ML 
model. Furthermore, it makes it a data specific model, limiting the generalizability of the solution to other 
AFM images and workflow. To overcome this challenge, we chose an unsupervised approach to quantify 
the similarity of feature vectors within a feature cube and group them together using a process commonly 
known as clustering. Clustering, being an unsupervised ML technique, requires no labeled data or training. 
While numerous clustering techniques exist, each of their performance is data specific. A common and 
widely used clustering technique is k-means clustering. 87 K-means clustering works by partitioning all 
the feature vectors into clusters by iteratively assigning each feature vector to the nearest center of a cluster 
and updating the center of the clusters based on the mean of the feature vector assigned. Euclidean distance 
is calculated between feature vectors to assess the distance between feature vectors in this process. Upon 
completion of the clustering process, ideally the feature vectors in each cluster would have similar textures. 
The number of clusters in k-means is a hyper-parameter, and for the task at hand, it was observed that two 
clusters best represent the light and dark domains for the pairs of described domain transforms and 
statistics from section II.A and II.B. One may also note that based on the nature of the problem and 
transforms multiple clusters may be observed to represent a single texture in this case the multiple indexes 

22 
 
must groups as one. By replacing the feature vectors in the feature cube by indexes which signify light or 
dark domains, we have a binary 2D matrix (index map) signifying the position of the domains on the raw 
image. (Figure 7) This 2D matrix (index map) is then used to calculate the domain size distribution 
(Figure 8).    
 
 
Figure 8: K-means clustering is applied on the (a) feature cube resulting from DFT (best transform for the 
specific goal of this paper) and variance statistics (as shown in Figure 3). This results in (b) an index map 
which represents the spatial position of domains within the image. We then use preexisting algorithms for 
domain size distribution 88 on the (b) index map for light domains to generate (c) a heat map that depicts 
the radius of the largest circle that could overlap that pixel. Also, in the heat map the pixels of the dark 
domain are zero when calculating on light domain. We repeat the process for the index map of the dark 
domain too. Using the scale bar in the metadata associated with the AFM image, from the heat map we 
calculate the domain size distribution in the appropriate distance units (nm for the AFM images we use).   
 
D. Metrics Used for Evaluating Model’s Performance 
Performance metrics are key to quantitatively measure the accuracy and efficacy of any 
workflow. The most widely used performance metrics for image segmentation problems include 
accuracy, Dice coefficient, and intersection of union (IoU).  
Accuracy quantifies the correctness of the index map and is defined as the fraction of number 
of correct index predictions divided by the total number of indexes in the index map.  
Dice similarity coefficient 89 is a useful metric used to measure the spatial overlap of domains 
from the predicted and ground truth images, Dice score for one domain is calculated as twice the 

23 
 
number of pixels with a common index (of the observing domain) in both the predicted and manually 
segmented images, divided by the total number of predicted and manually segmented pixels 
containing the index of the observing domain.   
The overall Dice score for the complete workflow is defined as the weighted average of Dice 
score for each domain calculated as,  
𝐷𝑖𝑐𝑒𝑠𝑐𝑜𝑟𝑒= 1
2 ∑𝐷𝑖𝑐𝑒𝑖
1
𝑖=0
(3) 
 
𝐷𝑖𝑐𝑒𝑖= 2 × |𝐴𝑖∩𝐵𝑖|
|𝐴𝑖| + |𝐵𝑖| 𝑖= 0,1(𝑙𝑖𝑔ℎ𝑡, 𝑑𝑎𝑟𝑘) 
𝐴𝑖= 𝑠𝑒𝑡𝑜𝑓𝑝𝑖𝑥𝑒𝑙𝑠∈𝑝𝑟𝑒𝑑𝑖𝑐𝑡𝑒𝑑𝑖𝑛𝑑𝑒𝑥𝑚𝑎𝑝𝑤𝑖𝑡ℎ𝑖𝑛𝑑𝑒𝑥𝑖 
𝐵𝑖= 𝑠𝑒𝑡𝑜𝑓𝑝𝑖𝑥𝑒𝑙𝑠∈𝑚𝑎𝑢𝑛𝑎𝑙𝑙𝑦𝑠𝑒𝑔𝑚𝑒𝑛𝑡𝑒𝑑𝑖𝑛𝑑𝑒𝑥𝑚𝑎𝑝𝑤𝑖𝑡ℎ𝑖𝑛𝑑𝑒𝑥𝑖 
|. | = 𝑐𝑎𝑟𝑑𝑖𝑛𝑎𝑙𝑖𝑡𝑦𝑜𝑓𝑠𝑒𝑡 
 
The Jaccard index or intersection of union (IoU) [83], like Dice, measures the spatial overlap of 
domains from the predicted and ground truth images. IoU for the entire workflow is calculated as 
the weighted average of IoU calculated for each domain where IoU of a domain is calculated as 
shown below:   
𝐼𝑜𝑈= 1
2 ∑𝐼𝑜𝑈𝑖
1
𝑖=0
(4) 
 
𝐼𝑜𝑈𝑖= |𝐴𝑖∩𝐵𝑖|
|𝐴𝑖∪𝐵𝑖| 𝑖= 0,1(𝑙𝑖𝑔ℎ𝑡, 𝑑𝑎𝑟𝑘) 
𝐴𝑖= 𝑠𝑒𝑡𝑜𝑓𝑝𝑖𝑥𝑒𝑙𝑠∈𝑝𝑟𝑒𝑑𝑖𝑐𝑡𝑒𝑑𝑖𝑛𝑑𝑒𝑥𝑚𝑎𝑝𝑤𝑖𝑡ℎ𝑖𝑛𝑑𝑒𝑥𝑖 
𝐵𝑖= 𝑠𝑒𝑡𝑜𝑓𝑝𝑖𝑥𝑒𝑙𝑠∈𝑚𝑎𝑢𝑛𝑎𝑙𝑙𝑦𝑠𝑒𝑔𝑚𝑒𝑛𝑡𝑒𝑑𝑖𝑛𝑑𝑒𝑥𝑚𝑎𝑝𝑤𝑖𝑡ℎ𝑖𝑛𝑑𝑒𝑥𝑖 
|. | = 𝑐𝑎𝑟𝑑𝑖𝑛𝑎𝑙𝑖𝑡𝑦𝑜𝑓𝑠𝑒𝑡 
 

24 
 
III.Experimentally Obtained AFM Image Datasets  
     Supramolecular block copolymer poly(oligo(ethylene glycol) methyl ether methacrylate)-sb-
polystyrene (POEGMA-sb-PS) was fabricated by blending two types of homopolymers: first homopolymer 
is diaminotriazine (DAT) functional POEGMA (POEGMA-DAT) and the second homopolymer is thymine 
(Thy) functional PS (PS-Thy). As the focus of this paper is on the machine learning workflow development, 
we do not present any details of the synthesis of these homopolymers which Gu and coworkers will present 
in a future publication focused on the synthesis of these molecules. Homopolymers POEGMA-DAT and 
PS-Thy in 1:1 molar ratio were dissolved in anhydrous toluene at room temperature to achieve a solution 
with polymer concentration of 20 mg/ml; the two homopolymers can associate to form supramolecular 
block copolymer POEGMA-sb-PS. By using varying molecular weights of POEGMA-DAT and PS-Thy 
homopolymers we achieved supramolecular block copolymers POEGMA-sb-PS with varying total chain 
lengths and block ratios.  
Finally, thin films of POEGMA-sb-PS were spin-cast onto silicon wafers at 2000 revolutions per 
minute (rpm) for one minute for characterization.  AFM images of the films of POEGMA-sb-PS were 
acquired on an Asylum Jupiter AFM microscope in AC-air mode. The dataset we use for the development 
of the machine learning workflow has 144 AFM images in total, imaged from 16 samples of POEGMA-
sb-PS obtained by using 7K and 10K Da PS blocks and 5K, 8K, 12K, 14K, 16K, 20K, 23K and 26K Da 
POEGMA blocks. Within each sample, the domains have relatively similar shapes. Across samples the 
domains vary drastically in size and shape.   
Each of the 144 AFM images contains distinct texture/domain patches of varying sizes and shapes, 
as depicted with representative images shown in Figure 1. These images in their raw form present phase 
angles which are quantized to intensity values for pixels and have dimensions of 384 pixels x 384 pixels in 
each image. Additionally, metadata is extracted from AFM images. The metadata contains details on 
measurement settings and length scales where the latter is helpful in mapping a pixel in an AFM image to 
length in real space (in nanometers). Visually the different texture patches in AFM images could be 
perceived as relatively light and dark regions, representing the two different domains. The AFM images in 

25 
 
our dataset inherit noise stemming from environmental factors and experimental conditions. The prevalent 
types of noise observed include line, random, and scar noise. 90 Utilizing prebuilt denoising algorithms 
tailored for AFM images enables effective noise reduction, yet some residual defects remain post-denoising 
(see examples in Supporting Information Section S.I.)  We note that our workflow can accommodate and 
tolerate these remaining imperfections.  
    
IV.Results  
We first assess the domain segmentation workflow with the various transforms and ResNet to evaluate 
their performance in terms of accuracy, consistency, and robustness handling our AFM image data. We do 
not assess the effectiveness of the domain size quantification methods, as we are using existing  approaches 
(porespy python package) for this step 88.  In principle the user could choose to develop their own in-house 
codes for any other desired domain quantification (e.g., percolation, tortuosity) after the domain 
segmentation task on the AFM image is complete.  
 
A. 
Assessment of Various Transforms and ResNet for Domain Segmentation 
In Figure 9 we present representative results of domain segmentation conducted with all transforms 
(described in section II.A) and ResNet50 (described in section II.B). Visually, the results of domain 
segmentation from discrete Fourier transform (DFT), discrete cosine transform (DCT), and Radon 
transform show the best match to the original AFM image. As described in section II.A, the similarity 
between DFT and DCT leads to their workflows having similar domain segmentations outputs. 
Additionally, we see similarity in the output of Radon transform workflow and the results from DFT and 
DCT. However, there are minor differences in prediction between Radon transform and DFT which are 
illustrated in Supporting Information Figure S7. 
 

26 
 
 
Figure 9: For two representative AFM images (a and h), the results of domain segmentation from various 
transforms and ResNet50 (deep learning model) are shown. The type of approach is denoted in the text 
below the images. Visually we can see that DFT, DCT, and Radon workflows perform the best by producing 
a binary image that is most similar in pattern to the original pre-processed AFM phase image. 
 
In the next few sub-sections, we will describe results from DFT workflow in more detail and we 
direct the reader to take these discussions on DFT workflow to be representative of DCT workflows as 
well. For results from DWT (Haar and bi-orthogonal wavelets), we direct the reader to the Supporting 
Information Section S. III.  
 
Figure 10: (a-f, right) Pairs of domain segmented images, corresponding to (a-f, left) preprocessed AFM 
phase images when processed through ResNet50 workflow. The results exhibit noise (a, d, f) and 
accuracy of predictions in domain segmentation is moderate (d, c, e).  
 

27 
 
Before we discuss the DFT results in more detail, we briefly describe the performance of ResNet50 
because such deep learning workflows are widely regarded as state of the art in image segmentation.  From 
Figure 9c and 9j, we observe that the domain segmentation using ResNet50-based workflow does not 
perform as well as the DFT workflow for our AFM images. We provide additional examples of poor domain 
segmentation results from ResNet50 model in Figure 10.  The overall poor performance of ResNet50 for 
the domain segmentation task as hand could be attributed to two factors: the choice tile size and the need 
for transfer learning.  
The reader may recall that tile size is controlled by the win factor which is an important parameter 
that regulates the transforms or deep learning models like ResNet50 to look for textural features of a 
particular spatial size. We found a win factor of 0.03 to work best for our dataset (see Supporting 
Information Section S.II). This win factor yields a tile size of 12 pixels x 12 pixels whereas ResNet50 has 
a fixed minimum of 32 pixels x 32 pixels. This causes the ResNet workflows segmentation resolution to be 
low (Figure 10b, 10c, and 10e) and predictions prone to noise (Figure 10a, 10d, and 10f). Second, the poor 
domain segmentation with higher sensitivity to noise as compared to DFT results suggest we need to 
improve the ResNet50 workflow. In Supporting Information Section S.V., we present additional steps 
that we took as we experimented with improving the ResNet50 performance. As we did not see significant 
improvement with ResNet50 or other domain transform, we declared DFT and DCT workflows the best of 
all the approaches we tested here.           
Figure 11 shows a few more examples that demonstrate visually that DFT workflow captures the 
domain segmentation for six more AFM images correctly even in the presence of noise (see the presence 
of a line in Figure 11e, dots in Figure 11f and blur in Figure 11b and 11c). DFT workflow also offers high 
computational speed and low memory usage, with processing speeds of 7 images per minute benchmarked 
on Intel i9-12900H CPU and 16GB of DDR5 RAM. 
  

28 
 
 
Figure 11: Segmentation results using DFT workflow: In each of the six parts of this figure, we show the 
(left) preprocessed AFM phase images and (right) the completed domain segmentation from the DFT 
workflow with variance statistics. If the spatial organization of the dark or white regions in the right images 
correspond to the patterns in the AFM image, then that would be a successful prediction.   
 
B. Analyzing the Statistical Features in DFT Workflow for Best Feature Extraction.  
 
For the DFT workflow, of all the statistical features – mean, variance, skewness, kurtosis – we find 
that the variance is the best metric for dimensionality reduction as it distinctly represents the two domains 
from the feature map. Figure 12 presents comparisons for the domain segmentation results when using the 
various statistical features for dimensionality reduction. For input AFM images in Figure 12a and 12d, we 
see domain segmented images when DFT was applied using all statistical features - mean, variance, skew, 
and kurtosis- in Figure 12b and 12e, respectively. In Figure 12b we see the algorithm identifies the domain 
boundaries but not the domains themselves whereas Figure 12e tries to predict the bulk of the domain. In 
contrast, when DFT was applied only using the variance, (Figures 12c and 12f) the domain segmented 
images correctly capture the domains in the original AFM images.  
Upon analyzing the correlation between the statistics (Figure 12g), we find that the kurtosis and 
skewness are perfectly correlated, there is high correlation between mean, skewness, and kurtosis, and a 
lack of correlation of variance with any of the other three statistical features. These correlations among 

29 
 
other features or lack thereof in case of variance warranted us to declare variance as the best metric to 
uniquely identify both the domains.    
 
Figure 12: Analysis of statistics used in DFT workflow. (a, d) are two preprocessed AFM phase images 
used for DFT workflow. Parts (b) and (e) are the domain segmented images when DFT was applied using 
all statistical features - mean, variance, skew, and kurtosis - for images in parts (a) and (d), respectively.  
part c and f are the domain segmented images when DFT was applied using only one statistical feature 
variance for images in parts a and d, respectively. Part (g) presents the correlation matrices of the 4 
statistics that show the mean, skewness, and kurtosis are highly correlated amongst themselves, and 
variance is mostly independent from the rest.  
 
C. Quantification of Segmentation Performance of DFT Workflow with Variance Statistics  
So far, our assessment of the DFT workflow with variance statistics has been purely qualitative using 
our visual sense. To quantify the performance of DFT workflow that visually looked superior to other 
methods, we created a test dataset selecting raw AFM images from the dataset with unique texture patterns 
arising from different polymer systems. To analyze the performance of domain segmentation, we manually 
segmented the test dataset images with an image annotation tool 91 to generate a (manually) annotated index 
map. Using various performance metrics (as defined in section II.D) we compare the manually annotated 
index map to the predicted index map from DFT workflow using variance as feature (Figure 13).  

30 
 
 
Figure 13: Results of AFM images segmentation using DFT workflow with variance statistics. For six 
preprocessed AFM phase images (left) from testing dataset we provide the Acc (accuracy) and Dice score 
for the comparison of domain segmentations using DFT workflow with variance statistics (right panel) 
versus ‘ground truth’ manual segmentation (middle panel).  
 Before we discuss the results of this quantified performance, it is critical for us to highlight the 
limitations of evaluating the predicted data in this manner. First, manual annotations have a precision vs. 
time tradeoff where higher precision in annotations consume more time to annotate even for a small test 
dataset. Balancing precision and time leads to some compromise in precision which makes the process 
prone to errors in the boundary regions of domains. Second, manual annotations are subjective (i.e., 
person’s perspective) leading to inconsistencies especially when two domains look similar to one person 
but different to another person. Therefore, the similarity metric calculated from the manual annotations is 
a good representation to measure the bulk of the workflow's performance but does not give us an accurate 
quantitative metric for each prediction as the manual annotations themselves could be flawed due to manual 
segmentation.  
 
For all the metrics described in section II.D, namely, accuracy, Dice coefficient and IoU, the value 
ranges from 0 to 1 where 1 is the most accurate and 0 is the least. In Table 3, we present the metrics of 
similarity between the predicted domain segmentation with the manual segmentation of AFM images in the 

31 
 
test dataset for the ‘best’ workflow (i.e. DFT workflow + variance statistics + k-means clustering). From 
the results for specific images in Figure 13 and the collective performance metrics in Table 3 we are able 
to show that the presented workflow using DFT with variance statistics and k-means clustering performs 
quite well.  
 
Table 3: Average performance metrics of segmentation on all images of test dataset with DFT workflow 
and variance statistics.  
Metric 
Value 
Accuracy 
0.81 
Jaccard Similarity 
0.76 
Dice Coefficient 
0.85 
 
 
D. 
Calculated Domain Size Information from the Segmented AFM Images 
In Supporting Information Figure S12, we present the distributions of light and dark domain sizes for 15 
selected AFM images in our dataset of 144 images. We observe that the quantitative predictions of domain 
sizes are consistent with human interpretation of the domain sizes (comparing with the help of the scale bar 
present in the image). In Supporting Information Figure S13, we present cumulative results of all AFM 
images from the various polymer films along with the average, standard deviation, maximum, and minimum 
of light and dark domain sizes observed in the films. These statistics are calculated on the average of domain 
sizes observed in AFM images captured across a polymer film sample. Thus, these statistics collate the 
information of domain sizes observed in a film which helps us draw various conclusions on the workflow’s 
performance and how the composition affects domain sizes in the polymer films. For instance, the small 
standard deviation of domain sizes from multiple AFM images captured from different regions of the same 
polymer film show that the domain size distribution across the sample is similar; this also indicates the 
workflow’s consistency in predictions. Furthermore, the light and dark domain sizes do not have a linear 

32 
 
nor an inverse relationship (in other words, we cannot guess the light domains’ sizes from the dark domains’ 
sizes) therefore it is essential to analyze both the light and dark domain sizes, independently. We also found 
a non-monotonic trend in the light and dark domain sizes for PS-Thy 7K and PS-Thy 10K with increase in 
molecular weight of POEGMA blocks. In a future publication, Gu and coworkers will describe the 
fundamental insights into these trends in detail.       
V.Conclusion 
 
Analysis of features of AFM images with polymer blends has traditionally been a time intensive manual task 
which inherits inconsistencies, biases, and errors. Our ML based workflow automates identification and 
quantification of domain sizes in AFM images of polymer blends. Our workflow comprised of DFT or DCT 
domain transforms with variance statistics and k-means clustering worked best in segmenting AFM images 
containing two types of domains from phase separating polymers. Besides visual evaluation, we quantified the 
performance of our workflow by calculating overlap in our workflow prediction against the manually annotated 
images for a small test dataset. We found high accuracy in overlap captured by Dice coefficient of ~0.85 on 
average on all of the test dataset. Further, the predictions accuracy is consistent across domains of different shapes 
and textures which proves the generalizability of the solution.  
This paper also shows that efficient problem formulation enables the nature of the workflow to remain 
unsupervised, which significantly reduces the traditional labor-intensive and subjective nature of manual 
interpretation of AFM images in soft materials science. As a result, it speeds up the development process and 
brings uniformity to analysis.  
Lastly, our paper is meant to serve as a guide for readers in polymer science and soft materials who may 
wish to extend the discussed methods to other microscopy images captured from soft materials. To transfer the 
knowledge in a precise manner we present a short summary of the various transforms and ML approaches we 
tested along with our experiences as we tested them for the task we had at hand.  
Table 4: Summary of transforms and machine learning approaches and our experiences during testing along with 
parameters that the user has to work with. 

33 
 
 
Approach  
Our Experience 
Parameters That User Selects 
Haar wavelet  
• 
Light on computational intensity 
• 
Works on gray scale images. 
• 
Can adjust the level of decomposition. 
• 
Requires no training. 
• 
Emphasizes gradients. 
• 
Explains and quantifies features. 
• 
Works well on small tile sizes. 
• 
Level of decomposition   
• 
Window size 
• 
Number of clusters or classes 
 
Biorthogonal  
wavelet  
• 
Light on computational intensity 
• 
Works on gray scale images. 
• 
Can adjust the level of decomposition.  
• 
Requires no training.  
• 
Works well on small tile sizes. 
• 
Type of wavelet 
• 
Window size 
• 
Start level of decomposition  
• 
Level of decomposition  
• 
Number of clusters or classes 
Fourier transform 
• 
Light on computational intensity 
• 
Works on gray scale images.  
• 
Requires no training. 
• 
Explains high vs low frequencies.  
• 
Works well on small tile sizes. 
• 
Window size 
• 
Number of clusters or classes 
Radon transform  
• 
Light on computational intensity 
• 
Works on gray scale images. 
• 
Easy to extract directional features & orientations.  
• 
Requires no training.  
• 
Works well on small tile sizes. 
• 
Type of wavelet 
• 
Window size 
• 
Starting level of decomposition  
• 
Level of decomposition  
• 
Number of clusters or classes 
Deep learning  
ResNet50 
• 
Able to generate large dimensional features. 
• 
Able to classify complex details. 
• 
Works on RGB images. 
• 
Requires no training if use as is makes sense. 
• 
Compute relatively slower. 
• 
Minimum tile size of 32 pixels x 32pixels.  
• 
Features are not explainable due to black box 
implementation. 
• 
Highly susceptible to noise. 
• 
Inputs must be normalized.    
• 
Window size min 32 pixels x 32 
pixels. 
• 
Layer selection for feature 
extraction.  
• 
Selection of weights for model. 
• 
Number of clusters or classes. 
 
 
Open-source Code availability 
We have made the Python program files open-source and public on this website.  
https://github.com/arthijayaraman-lab/Automated-Atomic-Force-Microscopy-Image-Analysis  
 
Acknowledgements 
A.J. and A.P. are grateful for financial support from Multi University Research Initiative (MURI) from the Army 
Research Office, Award Number W911NF2310260. Y. W. and X. G. are grateful for financial support from the 

34 
 
Department of Energy under the award number of DE-SC0024432. A portion of this work was done at the 
Molecular Foundry, which is supported by the Office of Science, Office of Basic Energy Sciences, of the U.S. 
Department of Energy under Contract No. DE-AC02-05CH11231. 
 
 

35 
 
References 
(1) Bockstaller, M. R.; Mickiewicz, R. A.; Thomas, E. L. Block copolymer nanocomposites: 
perspectives for tailored functional materials. Advanced materials 2005, 17 (11), 1331-1349. 
(2) Orilall, M. C.; Wiesner, U. Block copolymer based composition and morphology control in 
nanostructured hybrid materials for energy conversion and storage: solar cells, batteries, and fuel 
cells. Chemical Society Reviews 2011, 40 (2), 520-535. 
(3) Sarkar, B.; Alexandridis, P. Block copolymer–nanoparticle composites: Structure, functional 
properties, and processing. Progress in Polymer Science 2015, 40, 33-62. 
(4) Doerk, G. S.; Yager, K. G. Beyond native block copolymer morphologies. Molecular Systems 
Design & Engineering 2017, 2 (5), 518-538. 
(5) Fasolka, M. J.; Mayes, A. M. Block copolymer thin films: Physics and applications. Annual 
Review of Materials Research 2001, 31 (1), 323-355. 
(6) Hamley, I. Ordering in thin films of block copolymers: Fundamentals to potential applications. 
Progress in polymer science 2009, 34 (11), 1161-1210. 
(7) Yu, L.; Dean, K.; Li, L. Polymer blends and composites from renewable resources. Progress 
in polymer science 2006, 31 (6), 576-602. 
(8) Sionkowska, A. Current research on the blends of natural and synthetic polymers as new 
biomaterials. Progress in polymer science 2011, 36 (9), 1254-1276. 
(9) Balazs, A. C.; Emrick, T.; Russell, T. P. Nanoparticle polymer composites: Where two small 
worlds meet. Science 2006, 314 (5802), 1107-1110. DOI: 10.1126/science.1130557. 
(10) Moniruzzaman, M.; Winey, K. I. Polymer nanocomposites containing carbon nanotubes. 
Macromolecules 2006, 39 (16), 5194-5205. DOI: 10.1021/ma060733p. 
(11) Vaia, R. A.; Maguire, J. F. Polymer nanocomposites with prescribed morphology: going 
beyond nanoparticle-filled polymers. Chemistry of Materials 2007, 19 (11), 2736-2751. 
(12) Zeng, Q. H.; Yu, A. B.; Lu, G. Q. Multiscale modeling and simulation of polymer 
nanocomposites. Progress in Polymer Science (Oxford) 2008, 33 (2), 191-269. DOI: 
10.1016/j.progpolymsci.2007.09.002. 
(13) Jancar, J.; Douglas, J. F.; Starr, F. W.; Kumar, S. K.; Cassagnau, P.; Lesser, A. J.; Sternstein, 
S. S.; Buehler, M. J. Current issues in research on structure-property relationships in polymer 
nanocomposites. Polymer 2010, 51 (15), 3321-3343. DOI: 10.1016/j.polymer.2010.04.074. 
(14) Kumar, S. K.; Krishnamoorti, R. Nanocomposites: Structure, phase behavior, and properties. 
Annual Review of Chemical and Biomolecular Engineering 2010, 1, 37-58. DOI: 10.1146/annurev-
chembioeng-073009-100856. 
(15) Hore, M. J. A.; Composto, R. J. Functional polymer nanocomposites enhanced by nanorods. 
Macromolecules 2014, 47 (3), 875-887. DOI: 10.1021/ma402179w. 
(16) Ganesan, V.; Jayaraman, A. Theory and simulation studies of effective interactions, phase 
behavior and morphology in polymer nanocomposites. Soft Matter 2014, 10 (1), 13-38. DOI: 
10.1039/c3sm51864g. 
(17) Liu, M.; Jia, Z.; Jia, D.; Zhou, C. Recent advance in research on halloysite nanotubes-polymer 
nanocomposite. Progress in polymer science 2014, 39 (8), 1498-1525. 
(18) Kotal, M.; Bhowmick, A. K. Polymer nanocomposites from modified clays: Recent advances 
and challenges. Progress in Polymer Science 2015, 51, 127-187. 
(19) Kumar, S. K.; Ganesan, V.; Riggleman, R. A. Perspective: Outstanding theoretical questions 
in polymer-nanoparticle hybrids. Journal of Chemical Physics 2017, 147 (2). DOI: 
10.1063/1.4990501. 
(20) Gartner, T. E.; Jayaraman, A. Modeling and Simulations of Polymers: A Roadmap. 
Macromolecules 2019, 52 (3), 755-786. DOI: 10.1021/acs.macromol.8b01836. 
(21) Li, J.; Liu, X.; Feng, Y.; Yin, J. Recent progress in polymer/two-dimensional nanosheets 
composites with novel performances. Progress in Polymer Science 2022, 126, 101505. 
(22) Morgan, D.; Jacobs, R. Opportunities and challenges for machine learning in materials 
science. Annual Review of Materials Research 2020, 50, 71-103. 

36 
 
(23) Kadulkar, S.; Sherman, Z. M.; Ganesan, V.; Truskett, T. M. Machine Learning–Assisted 
Design of Material Properties. Annual Review of Chemical and Biomolecular Engineering 2022, 
13, 235-254. 
(24) Duan, C.; Nandy, A.; Kulik, H. J. Machine learning for the discovery, design, and engineering 
of materials. Annual Review of Chemical and Biomolecular Engineering 2022, 13, 405-429. 
(25) Choudhary, K.; DeCost, B.; Chen, C.; Jain, A.; Tavazza, F.; Cohn, R.; Park, C. W.; 
Choudhary, A.; Agrawal, A.; Billinge, S. J. Recent advances and applications of deep learning 
methods in materials science. npj Computational Materials 2022, 8 (1), 59. 
(26) Ge, M.; Su, F.; Zhao, Z.; Su, D. Deep learning analysis on microscopic imaging in materials 
science. 
Materials 
Today 
Nano 
2020, 
11, 
100087. 
DOI: 
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.mtnano.2020.100087. 
(27) Spurgeon, S. R.; Ophus, C.; Jones, L.; Petford-Long, A.; Kalinin, S. V.; Olszta, M. J.; Dunin-
Borkowski, R. E.; Salmon, N.; Hattar, K.; Yang, W.-C. D. Towards data-driven next-generation 
transmission electron microscopy. Nature materials 2021, 20 (3), 274-279. 
(28) Kalinin, S. V.; Ziatdinov, M.; Hinkle, J.; Jesse, S.; Ghosh, A.; Kelley, K. P.; Lupini, A. R.; 
Sumpter, B. G.; Vasudevan, R. K. Automated and autonomous experiments in electron and 
scanning probe microscopy. ACS nano 2021, 15 (8), 12604-12627. 
(29) Baskaran, A.; Kautz, E. J.; Chowdhary, A.; Ma, W.; Yener, B.; Lewis, D. J. Adoption of Image-
Driven Machine Learning for Microstructure Characterization and Materials Design: A 
Perspective. JOM 2021, 73 (11), 3639-3657. 
(30) Treder, K. P.; Huang, C.; Kim, J. S.; Kirkland, A. I. Applications of deep learning in electron 
microscopy. Microscopy 2022, 71 (Supplement_1), i100-i115. 
(31) Zhang, L.; Shao, S. Image-based machine learning for materials science. Journal of Applied 
Physics 2022, 132 (10), 100701. 
(32) Botifoll, M.; Pinto-Huguet, I.; Arbiol, J. Machine learning in electron microscopy for advanced 
nanocharacterization: current developments, available tools and future outlook. Nanoscale 
Horizons 2022. 
(33) Kalinin, S. V.; Mukherjee, D.; Roccapriore, K.; Blaiszik, B. J.; Ghosh, A.; Ziatdinov, M. A.; Al-
Najjar, A.; Doty, C.; Akers, S.; Rao, N. S.; et al. Machine learning for automated experimentation 
in scanning transmission electron microscopy. npj Computational Materials 2023, 9 (1), 227. DOI: 
10.1038/s41524-023-01142-0. 
(34) Chen, Z.; Andrejevic, N.; Drucker, N. C.; Nguyen, T.; Xian, R. P.; Smidt, T.; Wang, Y.; 
Ernstorfer, R.; Tennant, D. A.; Chan, M.; Li, M. Machine learning on neutron and x-ray scattering 
and spectroscopies. Chemical Physics Reviews 2021, 2 (3). DOI: 10.1063/5.0049111. 
(35) Yager, K. G.; Majewski, P. W.; Noack, M. M.; Fukuto, M. Autonomous x-ray scattering. 
Nanotechnology 2023, 34 (32), 322001. 
(36) Anker, A. S.; Butler, K. T.; Selvan, R.; Jensen, K. M. Ø. Machine learning for analysis of 
experimental scattering and spectroscopy data in materials chemistry. Chemical Science 2023, 
14 (48), 14003-14019, 10.1039/D3SC05081E. DOI: 10.1039/D3SC05081E. 
(37) Xu, P.; Chen, H.; Li, M.; Lu, W. New Opportunity: Machine Learning for Polymer Materials 
Design and Discovery. Advanced Theory and Simulations 2022, 5 (5), 2100565. DOI: 
https://doi.org/10.1002/adts.202100565. 
(38) Li, Y.-Q.; Jiang, Y.; Wang, L.-Q.; Li, J.-F. Data and Machine Learning in Polymer Science. 
Chinese Journal of Polymer Science 2023, 41 (9), 1371-1376. DOI: 10.1007/s10118-022-2868-
0. 
(39) Lu, S.; Jayaraman, A. Machine learning for analyses and automation of structural 
characterization of polymer materials. Progress in Polymer Science 2024, 153, 101828. DOI: 
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.progpolymsci.2024.101828. 
(40) Wang, D.; Russell, T. P. Advances in Atomic Force Microscopy for Probing Polymer Structure 
and Properties. Macromolecules 2018, 51 (1), 3-24. DOI: 10.1021/acs.macromol.7b01459. 
(41) Darling, S. B. Directing the self-assembly of block copolymers. Progress in Polymer Science 
2007, 32 (10), 1152-1204. DOI: https://doi.org/10.1016/j.progpolymsci.2007.05.004. 

37 
 
(42) Mai, Y.; Eisenberg, A. Self-assembly of block copolymers. Chemical Society Reviews 2012, 
41 (18), 5969-5985, 10.1039/C2CS35115C. DOI: 10.1039/C2CS35115C. 
(43) Wang, Y.; Zhang, S.; Freychet, G.; Li, Z.; Chen, K.-L.; Liu, C.-T.; Cao, Z.; Chiu, Y.-C.; Xia, 
W.; Gu, X. Highly Deformable Rigid Glassy Conjugated Polymeric Thin Films. Advanced 
Functional Materials 2023, 33 (50), 2306576. DOI: https://doi.org/10.1002/adfm.202306576. 
(44) Mooney, M.; Nyayachavadi, A.; Awada, A.; Iakovidis, E.; Wang, Y.; Chen, M.-N.; Liu, Y.; Xu, 
J.; Chiu, Y.-C.; Gu, X.; Rondeau-Gagné, S. Asymmetric side-chain engineering in semiconducting 
polymers: a platform for greener processing and post-functionalization of organic electronics. 
Polymer Chemistry 2023, 14 (5), 562-572, 10.1039/D2PY01244H. DOI: 10.1039/D2PY01244H. 
(45) Bai, H. T.; Wu, S. Nanowire Detection in AFM Images Using Deep Learning. Microscopy and 
Microanalysis 2021, 27 (1), 54-64. DOI: 10.1017/s143192762002468x. 
(46) Bai, H. T.; Wu, S. Deep-learning-based nanowire detection in AFM images for automated 
nanomanipulation. 
Nanotechnology 
and 
Precision 
Engineering 
2021, 
4 
(1). 
DOI: 
10.1063/10.0003218. 
(47) Han, Y. X.; Liu, Y. H.; Wang, B.; Chen, Q. C.; Song, L. L.; Tong, L.; Lai, C. B.; Konagaya, A. 
A novel transfer learning for recognition of overlapping nano object. Neural Computing & 
Applications 2022, 34 (7), 5729-5741. DOI: 10.1007/s00521-021-06731-y. 
(48) Carracedo-Cosme, J.; Romero-Muñiz, C.; Pérez, R. A Deep Learning Approach for Molecular 
Classification Based on AFM Images. Nanomaterials 2021, 11 (7). DOI: 10.3390/nano11071658. 
(49) Zhang, J. T.; Ren, J.; Hu, S. Q.; Ieee. AFM Imaging Defect Detection and Classification with 
Artificial Intelligence and Deep Learning. In IEEE 23rd International Conference on 
Nanotechnology (NANO), Jeju, SOUTH KOREA, Jul 02-05, 2023; 2023; pp 447-452. DOI: 
10.1109/nano58406.2023.10231258. 
(50) Yablon, D.; Chakraborty, I.; Passino, H.; Iyer, K.; Doufas, A.; Shivokhin, M. Deep learning to 
establish structure property relationships of impact copolymers from AFM phase images. Mrs 
Communications 2021, 11 (6), 962-968. DOI: 10.1557/s43579-021-00103-2. 
(51) Chang, Y. G.; Liu, Z.; Wu, Y. N.; Fang, Y. C. Deep-Learning-Based Automated Morphology 
Analysis With Atomic Force Microscopy. Ieee Transactions on Automation Science and 
Engineering 2023. DOI: 10.1109/tase.2023.3346887. 
(52) Kim, Y. J.; Lim, J.; Kim, D. N. Accelerating AFM Characterization via Deep-Learning-Based 
Image Super-Resolution. Small 2022, 18 (3). DOI: 10.1002/smll.202103779. 
(53) Liu, Y.; Sun, Q.; Lu, W.; Wang, H.; Sun, Y.; Wang, Z.; Lu, X.; Zeng, K. General Resolution 
Enhancement Method in Atomic Force Microscopy Using Deep Learning. Advanced Theory and 
Simulations 2019, 2 (2), 1800137. DOI: https://doi.org/10.1002/adts.201800137. 
(54) Jung, H.; Han, G.; Jung, S. J.; Han, S. W. Comparative study of deep learning algorithms for 
atomic 
force 
microscopy 
image 
denoising. 
Micron 
2022, 
161, 
103332. 
DOI: 
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.micron.2022.103332. 
(55) Jeong, J.; Kim, T.; Lee, B. J.; Lee, J. Predicting Atomic Force Microscopy Topography from 
Optical Microscopes Using Deep Learning. Advanced Intelligent Systems 2023, 5 (1). DOI: 
10.1002/aisy.202200317. 
(56) Lu, S.; Jayaraman, A. Pair-Variational Autoencoders for Linking and Cross-Reconstruction 
of Characterization Data from Complementary Structural Characterization Techniques. JACS Au 
2023, 3 (9), 2510-2521. DOI: 10.1021/jacsau.3c00275. 
(57) Akepati, S. V. R.; Gupta, N.; Jayaraman, A. Computational Reverse Engineering Analysis of 
the Scattering Experiment Method for Interpretation of 2D Small-Angle Scattering Profiles 
(CREASE-2D). JACS Au 2024. DOI: 10.1021/jacsau.4c00068. 
(58) Lu, S. Z.; Montz, B.; Emrick, T.; Jayaraman, A. Semi-supervised machine learning workflow 
for analysis of nanowire morphologies from transmission electron microscopy images. Digital 
Discovery 2022, 1 (6), 816-833. DOI: 10.1039/d2dd00066k. 
(59) Xu, X.; Wei, Q.; Li, H.; Wang, Y.; Chen, Y.; Jiang, Y. Recognition of polymer configurations 
by 
unsupervised 
learning. 
Physical 
Review 
E 
2019, 
99 
(4), 
043307. 
DOI: 
10.1103/PhysRevE.99.043307. 

38 
 
(60) Patel, R. A.; Webb, M. A. Data-Driven Design of Polymer-Based Biomaterials: High-
throughput Simulation, Experimentation, and Machine Learning. ACS Applied Bio Materials 2024, 
7 (2), 510-527. DOI: 10.1021/acsabm.2c00962. 
(61) Lee, J. H.; Illee, N.; Kim, S. D. A FAST AND ADAPTIVE METHOD TO ESTIMATE TEXTURE 
STATISTICS BY THE SPATIAL GRAY LEVEL DEPENDENCE MATRIX (SGLDM) FOR 
TEXTURE IMAGE SEGMENTATION. Pattern Recognition Letters 1992, 13 (4), 291-303. DOI: 
10.1016/0167-8655(92)90079-f. 
(62) Muzzolini, R.; Yang, Y. H.; Pierson, R. TEXTURE CHARACTERIZATION USING ROBUST 
STATISTICS. Pattern Recognition 1994, 27 (1), 119-134. DOI: 10.1016/0031-3203(94)90022-1. 
(63) Zhang, R.; Wang, Q.; Zhang, P. Image Texture Feature Extraction Based on Gabor 
Transform. Rev. Téc. Ing. Univ. Zulia 2016, 39 (1), 237-244. 
(64) Verma, B.; Muthukkumarasamy, V.; He, C. Unsupervised clustering of texture features using 
SOM and Fourier transform. In Proceedings of the International Joint Conference on Neural 
Networks, 2003., 2003; IEEE: Vol. 2, pp 1237-1242. 
(65) Bashar, M. K.; Matsumoto, T.; Ohnishi, N. Wavelet transform-based locally orderless images 
for texture segmentation. Pattern Recognition Letters 2003, 24 (15), 2633-2650. DOI: 
10.1016/s0167-8655(03)00107-7. 
(66) Simon, P.; Uma, V. Deep learning based feature extraction for texture classification. Procedia 
Computer Science 2020, 171, 1680-1687. 
(67) Ronneberger, O.; Fischer, P.; Brox, T. U-net: Convolutional networks for biomedical image 
segmentation. In Medical image computing and computer-assisted intervention–MICCAI 2015: 
18th international conference, Munich, Germany, October 5-9, 2015, proceedings, part III 18, 
2015; Springer: pp 234-241. 
(68) Livens, S.; Scheunders, P.; Wouwer, G.; Dyck, D. Wavelets for texture analysis, an overview; 
1997. DOI: 10.1049/cp:19970958. 
(69) Feng, Z.; Ju Fu, F.; Qing Yun, S. Texture feature based on local Fourier transform. In 
Proceedings 2001 International Conference on Image Processing (Cat. No.01CH37205), 7-10 
Oct. 2001, 2001; Vol. 2, pp 610-613 vol.612. DOI: 10.1109/ICIP.2001.958567. 
(70) Song-Shan, X.; Yong-Xing, W. Rotation-invariant texture analysis using Radon and Fourier 
transforms. Journal of Physics: Conference Series 2007, 48 (1), 1459. DOI: 10.1088/1742-
6596/48/1/268. 
(71) Redmon, J.; Divvala, S.; Girshick, R.; Farhadi, A. You only look once: Unified, real-time object 
detection. In Proceedings of the IEEE conference on computer vision and pattern recognition, 
2016; pp 779-788. 
(72) Wu, H.; Zhang, J.; Huang, K.; Liang, K.; Yu, Y. Fastfcn: Rethinking dilated convolution in the 
backbone for semantic segmentation. arXiv preprint arXiv:1903.11816 2019. 
(73) Chen, L. C.; Papandreou, G.; Kokkinos, I.; Murphy, K.; Yuille, A. L. DeepLab: Semantic Image 
Segmentation with Deep Convolutional Nets, Atrous Convolution, and Fully Connected CRFs. 
IEEE Transactions on Pattern Analysis and Machine Intelligence 2018, 40 (4), 834-848. DOI: 
10.1109/TPAMI.2017.2699184. 
(74) Hosna, A.; Merry, E.; Gyalmo, J.; Alom, Z.; Aung, Z.; Azim, M. A. Transfer learning: a friendly 
introduction. Journal of Big Data 2022, 9 (1), 102. DOI: 10.1186/s40537-022-00652-w. 
(75) Kermany, D. S.; Goldbaum, M.; Cai, W. J.; Valentim, C. C. S.; Liang, H. Y.; Baxter, S. L.; 
McKeown, A.; Yang, G.; Wu, X. K.; Yan, F. B.; et al. Identifying Medical Diagnoses and Treatable 
Diseases 
by 
Image-Based 
Deep 
Learning. 
Cell 
2018, 
172 
(5), 
1122-+. 
DOI: 
10.1016/j.cell.2018.02.010. 
(76) Yamada, H.; Liu, C.; Wu, S.; Koyama, Y.; Ju, S. H.; Shiomi, J.; Morikawa, J.; Yoshida, R. 
Predicting Materials Properties with Little Data Using Shotgun Transfer Learning. Acs Central 
Science 2019, 5 (10), 1717-1730. DOI: 10.1021/acscentsci.9b00804. 
(77) R. Gonzales, R. W. Digital Image Processing; Addison-Wesley Publishing Company, 1992. 
(78) Ahmed, N.; Natarajan, T.; Rao, K. R. Discrete Cosine Transform. IEEE Transactions on 
Computers 1974, C-23 (1), 90-93. DOI: 10.1109/T-C.1974.223784. 

39 
 
(79) Pun, C. M.; Zhu, H. M. Textural Image Segmentation Using Discrete Cosine Transform. In 
3rd International Conference on Communications and Information Technology, Vouliagmeni, 
GREECE, Dec 29-31, 2009; 2009; pp 54-+. 
(80) Peters, T. Data-driven science and engineering: machine learning, dynamical systems, and 
control: by SL Brunton and JN Kutz, 2019, Cambridge, Cambridge University Press, 472 pp.,£ 
49.99 (hardback), ISBN 9781108422093. Level: postgraduate. Scope: textbook; Taylor & Francis, 
2019. 
(81) Lee, G.; Gommers, R.; Waselewski, F.; Wohlfahrt, K.; Aaron. PyWavelets: A Python package 
for wavelet analysis. Journal of Open Source Software 2019, 4, 1237. DOI: 10.21105/joss.01237. 
(82) Navya, K. T.; Shaik, F. H.; Reddy, G. B.; Ieee. Segmentation of Lung Vessels Using Radon 
Transform. In 2nd International Conference on Circuits, Controls, and Communications (CCUBE), 
Bangalore, INDIA, Dec 15-16, 2017; 2017; pp 121-124. 
(83) Bunk, J.; Bappy, J. H.; Mohammed, T. M.; Nataraj, L.; Flenner, A.; Manjunath, B. S.; 
Chandrasekaran, S.; Roy-Chowdhury, A. K.; Peterson, L.; Ieee. Detection and Localization of 
Image Forgeries using Resampling Features and Deep Learning. In 2017 IEEE CONFERENCE 
ON COMPUTER VISION AND PATTERN RECOGNITION WORKSHOPS (CVPRW), 2017. 
(84) Hughes, R. R.; Drinkwater, B. W.; Smith, R. A. Characterisation of carbon fibre-reinforced 
polymer composites through radon-transform analysis of complex eddy-current data. Composites 
Part B-Engineering 2018, 148, 252-259. DOI: 10.1016/j.compositesb.2018.05.007. 
(85) Jafari-Khouzani, K.; Soltanian-Zadeh, H. Radon transform orientation estimation for rotation 
invariant texture analysis. IEEE Transactions on Pattern Analysis and Machine Intelligence 2005, 
27 (6), 1004-1008. DOI: 10.1109/TPAMI.2005.126. 
(86) Russakovsky, O.; Deng, J.; Su, H.; Krause, J.; Satheesh, S.; Ma, S.; Huang, Z.; Karpathy, 
A.; Khosla, A.; Bernstein, M.; et al. ImageNet Large Scale Visual Recognition Challenge. 
International Journal of Computer Vision 2015, 115 (3), 211-252. DOI: 10.1007/s11263-015-
0816-y. 
(87) Bishop, C. M. Pattern recognition and machine learning. Springer google schola 2006, 2, 
645-678. 
(88) Gostick, J. T.; Khan, Z. A.; Tranter, T. G.; Kok, M. D.; Agnaou, M.; Sadeghi, M.; Jervis, R. 
PoreSpy: A python toolkit for quantitative analysis of porous media images. Journal of Open 
Source Software 2019, 4 (37), 1296. 
(89) Müller, D.; Soto-Rey, I.; Kramer, F. Towards a guideline for evaluation metrics in medical 
image segmentation. BMC Research Notes 2022, 15 (1), 210. 
(90) Nečas, D.; Klapetek, P. Gwyddion: an open-source software for SPM data analysis. Open 
Physics 2012, 10 (1), 181-188. DOI: doi:10.2478/s11534-011-0096-2 (acccessed 2024-04-28). 
(91) Maxim, T.; Mikhail, M.; Andrey, H.; Nikolai, L. Label Studio : Data labeling software. 2020. 
 
 

S.1 
 
 
 
SUPPORTING INFORMATION 
 
Machine Learning for Analyzing Atomic Force Microscopy (AFM) Images 
Generated from Polymer Blends 
 
Aanish Paruchuri 1,Yunfei Wang2, Xiaodan Gu2, Arthi Jayaraman 3,4,5 * 
 
1. Master of Science in Data Science Program, University of Delaware, Newark DE 19713 
2. School of Polymer Science and Engineering, 118 College Drive, #5050 University of Southern Mississippi, 
Hattiesburg, MS 39406 
3. Department of Chemical and Biomolecular Engineering, 150 Academy St, University of Delaware, Newark DE 19713 
4. Department of Materials Science and Engineering, University of Delaware, Newark DE 19713 
5. Data Science Institute, University of Delaware, Newark DE, 19713 
 
* Corresponding authors arthij@udel.edu   
 
 

S.2 
 
 
S.I. Dataset 
A. Link to raw data 
  
Raw data used in this study has been deposited in Zenodo DOI: 
https://zenodo.org/doi/10.5281/zenodo.11179874  
 
B. Visualization of noise in dataset prior and post denoising 
 
 
Figure S1:  Image pre-processing results. (a-f) For the presented six AFM images, the image on the left 
corresponds to the noisy AFM phase measurement and the image on the right corresponds to the 
denoised image. Image denoising operations are performed by Gwyddion software [1].      
 
 
Figure S2: (a-h) Pre-processed AFM phase images after denoising with Gwyddion[1] software; these 
images are shown to demonstrate that even after denoising these images retain some noise (visible 
defects).  

S.3 
 
C. Thresholding techniques applied on dataset 
 
Figure S3: OTSU thresholding algorithm applied on (a,c) pre-processed AFM phase images after 
denoising. (b,d) are their respective outputs when OTSU is applied locally on patches of the pre-
processed AFM phase images and the denoised with image morphology operation. Thresholding fails in 
(d) due to the line noise and (b) lacks consistency in predicting continuity.  
 
S.II. 
Tiles and Win Factor  
A. How to choose the best win factor 
 
Figure S4: (a-f) Samples of tiles with varying win factor from 0.01 to 0.10 generated from one pre-
processed AFM phase image shown in part (g). To find the best tile size, we increase the win factor 
iteratively and choose the minimum size that can distinguish between light and dark domains in the 
AFM image. We can see that in parts (a) and (b) with low win factors 0.01 and 0.02 one cannot 
distinguish between the two domains. We notice that in part (c) the win factor of 0.03 presents a 
visual difference in light and dark domains. Therefore, we choose this as the best win factor. To 
confirm the details are of domains and not noise, we also generate for the reader the images in parts 
(d-f) with larger win factors.    
 
B. Pseudo code of generating tiles from input image with given win factor 
A raw image is sub-sampled into tiles with the following workflow using steps below: 
 
 
𝑡𝑖𝑙𝑒_𝑤𝑖𝑑𝑡ℎ = 𝑖𝑛𝑝𝑢𝑡_𝑖𝑚𝑔_𝑤𝑖𝑑𝑡ℎ∗𝑤𝑖𝑛_𝑓𝑎𝑐𝑡𝑜𝑟                                        (1)                                     

S.4 
 
𝑡𝑖𝑙𝑒_ℎ𝑒𝑖𝑔ℎ𝑡 =  𝑖𝑛𝑝𝑢𝑡_𝑖𝑚𝑔_ℎ𝑒𝑖𝑔ℎ𝑡∗𝑤𝑖𝑛_𝑓𝑎𝑐𝑡𝑜𝑟                                        (2)     
 
 
𝑇_𝑖𝑗= 𝑖𝑛𝑝𝑢𝑡_𝑖𝑚𝑔_𝑖𝑚𝑔[𝑖 −𝑡𝑖𝑙𝑒_𝑤𝑖𝑑𝑡ℎ
2
 ∶𝑖+ 𝑡𝑖𝑙𝑒_𝑤𝑖𝑑𝑡ℎ
2
, 𝑗−𝑡𝑖𝑙𝑒_ℎ𝑒𝑖𝑔ℎ𝑡
2
: 𝑗 + 𝑡𝑖𝑙𝑒_ℎ𝑒𝑖𝑔ℎ𝑡
2
 ]  
𝑤ℎ𝑒𝑟𝑒,                  
 
𝑖 = (𝑡𝑖𝑙𝑒_𝑤𝑖𝑑𝑡ℎ
2
),(𝑡𝑖𝑙𝑒_𝑤𝑖𝑑𝑡ℎ
2
+ 𝑠𝑡𝑟𝑖𝑑𝑒), (𝑡𝑖𝑙𝑒_𝑤𝑖𝑑𝑡ℎ
2
 + 2 ∗𝑠𝑡𝑟𝑖𝑑𝑒), . . . ,(𝑖𝑛𝑝𝑢𝑡_𝑖𝑚𝑔_ℎ𝑒𝑖𝑔ℎ𝑡 
−𝑡𝑖𝑙𝑒_𝑤𝑖𝑑𝑡ℎ
2
)    
𝑗 = (𝑡𝑖𝑙𝑒_ℎ𝑒𝑖𝑔ℎ𝑡
2
),(𝑡𝑖𝑙𝑒_ℎ𝑒𝑖𝑔ℎ𝑡
2
+ 𝑠𝑡𝑟𝑖𝑑𝑒), (𝑡𝑖𝑙𝑒_ℎ𝑒𝑖𝑔ℎ𝑡
2
 + 2 ∗𝑠𝑡𝑟𝑖𝑑𝑒), .. . , (𝑖𝑛𝑝𝑢𝑡_𝑖𝑚𝑔_ℎ𝑒𝑖𝑔ℎ𝑡
−𝑡𝑖𝑙𝑒_ℎ𝑒𝑖𝑔ℎ𝑡
2
)                                                                                          (3) 
 
 
Variables stride and win factor have a direct impact on feature extraction and are also responsible 
for the resolution of domain segmentation output. Stride has values starting at 1. As we increase 
stride, it decreases the resolution in prediction of domain segmentation output. The win factor is 
responsible for the tile size and a large tile size results in more boundary pixels excluded from 
analysis (the latter is described in main manuscript’s section II A).   
 
 

S.5 
 
S.III. 
Discrete Wavelet Transform (DWT) 
A. Performance and characteristics of different wavelet types in DWT 
workflow 
 
Figure S5: Parts (a) and (d) are two preprocessed AFM phase images and parts (b, c) and parts (e, f) are 
their domain segmentation outputs, respectively. The DWT workflow’s domain segmentation outputs from 
(b, e) Haar wavelet and (c, f) biorthogonal wavelets are shown. Depending on the convolutional filters 
inherited by the type of wavelet, each has a different characteristic of decomposition. (b, e) Haar wavelets 
focus more on capturing larger gradients whereas (c, f) biorthogonal wavelets capture more continuous 
gradients. As a result, we get to see different domain segmentations in both the cases (b, e) and (c, f).    
 
B. Extension of DWT workflow on other literature datasets: scope and 
opportunities   
 
Figure S6: DWT methods applied to other AFM images (parts a and e) adapted with permission from [2, 
3]  Copyright 2001 American Chemical Society. The images in (b, c) and (d, f) are the corresponding Haar 

S.6 
 
and bioorthogonal domain segmentations for parts a and e, respectively. The domain segmentations are 
useful to study fibril like patterns in AFM images where features like length, directionality, and orientation 
of fibrils are of interest. 
 
S.IV. 
 Radon Transform  
 
Figure S7: DFT and Radon workflow applied on (a) a pre-processed AFM phase image resulting in (b, c) 
domain segmentations. In parts (b) and (c) the green circles highlight the minor differences in segmentation 
obtained from these two workflows. 
 
 
S.V. 
ResNet50: 
Methods 
experimented 
to 
improve 
ResNet50 
performance 
1. Methods to improve performance on noisy data.   
 
Figure S8: ResNet50 workflow applied on pre-processed AFM phase images shown on the left in parts (a) 
and (b) without histogram equalization results in the right image in parts (a) and (b). As we can see the 
results are prone to noise in the pre-processed AFM image as ResNet50 is sensitive to scale and outliers in 
the image. Applying histogram equalization to the preprocessed AFM phase images before using the 
ResNet50 workflow shows tremendous improvement in the results as shown in parts (c) and (d). 

S.7 
 
 
2. Methods to address minimum tile size.   
 
Figure S9: To address the input tile size constraint discussed in the main manuscript’s Section II. B, one 
could increase the overall image size with image interpolation techniques which can increase the scales of 
features in tiles. In parts (a) and (e) we show two histogram equalized pre-processed AFM phase images 
that are sent into the ResNet50 workflow yielding the domain segmented images in parts (b-d) and parts ( 
f-h) when the pre-processed images were interpolated to sizes (c, g) 800 pixels x 800 pixels, (b, f) kept same 
as input 384 pixels x 384 pixels, and (d, h) 1200 pixels x 1200 pixels. We notice that interpolation has 
increased the workflow’s ability to capture highly granular features (light domains inside larger dark 
domains are captured in parts c and d as compared to part b. We note, however, that the interpolation 
method’s computational cost scales exponentially with increase in interpolation size.            
 
3. Understanding the use of ResNet 50 architecture to extract features 
 
Figure S10: ResNet50 is a deep learning algorithm with multiple layers. For the input histogram equalized 
preprocessed AFM phase images shown in parts (a) and (e), we show the domain segmentation images 
generated by using feature maps from various stages of ResNet50 model shown in part (i). In parts (b) and 
(f) are the results for the two inputs when we used feature maps from stage 1 of the flow in part (i). In parts 
(c) and  (g) are results using stage 2 feature maps and in parts (d) and (h) are results using stage3 features 
maps. With increase in depth, we notice that the workflow becomes more prone to noise [e.g., you can see 
noise in part (h) that we do not see in parts (f) and (g)]; there can also be misclassification in boundary 
regions of domains.   

S.8 
 
S.VI. 
Domain Size Distribution Calculated Using Porespy Package 
 
Figure S11: Illustration of domain size distribution calculations. (a) Index maps (binary images) 
containing domain segmented into light and dark domains are used to perform domain size distribution 
calculation. Porespy [4] is a python package that performs porosimetry simulations on index maps 
resulting in  2D heat maps as shown in the right side of parts (b) and (c). In these heat maps the color of 
each pixel depicts the radius of the largest circle that could overlap that pixel and the pixels of the non-
observing domain are zero. From the heat maps pixel values, we can then calculate domain size distribution 
in real units using the scale bar present in the metadata associated with the AFM image used in the 
workflow; parts (b) and (c) on the left present these distributions. 
 
 
 

S.9 
 
In Figure S12 we present the calculated domain size distributions for representative 15 AFM images from 
the 144 images we had in the dataset. All of these 15 AFM images were segmented using DFT with variance 
as the features. As described before, these AFM images were obtained from supramolecular block 
copolymer with varying PS and POEGMA block lengths.  
 
 Pre-processed image 
         Light domain                            Dark domain 
a). 
 
 
 
 
 
b). 
 
 
 
 
 
 
c). 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

S.10 
 
 
 
 
d). 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
e). 
 
 
 
 
 
 
f). 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

S.11 
 
g). 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
h). 
 
 
 
 
 
 
i). 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

S.12 
 
j). 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
k). 
 
 
 
 
 
 
l). 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

S.13 
 
m). 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
n). 
 
 
 
 
 
 
o). 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure S12. Results of domain size distribution for another 15 representative AFM images. Each panel 
we have two figures – left is the original AFM pre-processed image and on the right is the domain size 
distributions (Probability vs. domain sizes in nm) of dark and light domains. 
 

S.14 
 
 
Figure S13. Summary of results from domain size distributions for various supramolecular 
polymers in the AFM dataset shown in Figure S12. Here we show the value of the molecular 
weights of the POEGMA-DAT and PS-Thy in the leftmost column and top-most row. In each part 

S.15 
 
on the left we show the representative AFM image for that system. On the right we share the 
average, standard deviation, maximum, and minimum of the domain sizes seen for various 
images collected for each sample with the corresponding molecular weights of the POEGMA-
DAT and PS-Thy. 
 
 
References  
 
1. 
Nečas, D. and P. Klapetek, Gwyddion: an open-source software for SPM data analysis. Open 
Physics, 2012. 10(1): p. 181-188. 
2. 
Hobbs, J.K., A.D.L. Humphris, and M.J. Miles, In-Situ Atomic Force Microscopy of Polyethylene 
Crystallization. 1. Crystallization from an Oriented Backbone. Macromolecules, 2001. 34(16): p. 
5508-5519. 
3. 
Hobbs, J.K. and R.A. Register, Imaging Block Copolymer Crystallization in Real Time with the 
Atomic Force Microscope. Macromolecules, 2006. 39(2): p. 703-710. 
4. 
Gostick, J.T., et al., PoreSpy: A python toolkit for quantitative analysis of porous media images. 
Journal of Open Source Software, 2019. 4(37): p. 1296. 
 
