AiiDA: Automated Interactive Infrastructure and
Database for Computational Science
Giovanni Pizzia,1, Andrea Cepellottia,1, Riccardo Sabatinia, Nicola Marzaria,
Boris Kozinskyb
aTheory and Simulation of Materials (THEOS), and National Centre for Computational
Design and Discovery of Novel Materials (MARVEL), ´Ecole Polytechnique F´ed´erale de
Lausanne, 1015 Lausanne, Switzerland
bResearch and Technology Center, Robert Bosch LLC, Cambridge, Massachusetts 02139,
USA
Abstract
Computational science has seen in the last decades a spectacular rise in the scope, breadth,
and depth of its eﬀorts. Notwithstanding this prevalence and impact, it is often still performed
using the renaissance model of individual artisans gathered in a workshop, under the guidance
of an established practitioner. Great beneﬁts could follow instead from adopting concepts
and tools coming from computer science to manage, preserve, and share these computational
eﬀorts. We illustrate here our paradigm sustaining such vision, based around the four pillars
of Automation, Data, Environment, and Sharing. We then discuss its implementation in the
open-source AiiDA platform (http://www.aiida.net), that has been tuned ﬁrst to the demands
of computational materials science. AiiDA’s design is based on directed acyclic graphs to track
the provenance of data and calculations, and ensure preservation and searchability. Remote
computational resources are managed transparently, and automation is coupled with data
storage to ensure reproducibility. Last, complex sequences of calculations can be encoded into
scientiﬁc workﬂows. We believe that AiiDA’s design and its sharing capabilities will encourage
the creation of social ecosystems to disseminate codes, data, and scientiﬁc workﬂows.
Keywords:
high-throughput, materials database, scientiﬁc workﬂow, directed
acyclic graph, provenance, reproducibility
1. Introduction
Computational science has now emerged as a new paradigm straddling ex-
periments and theory. While in the early days of computer simulations only a
small number of expensive simulations could be performed, nowadays the ca-
pacity of computer simulations calls for the development of concepts and tools
to organize research eﬀorts with the ideas and practices of computer science.
In this paper, we take as a case study computational materials science, given
that the accuracy and predictive power of the current “quantum engines” (com-
putational codes performing quantum-mechanical simulations) have made these
Email addresses: giovanni.pizzi@epfl.ch (Giovanni Pizzi),
andrea.cepellotti@epfl.ch (Andrea Cepellotti)
1These two authors equally contributed to the work.
Preprint submitted to Elsevier
September 9, 2015
arXiv:1504.01163v2  [physics.comp-ph]  8 Sep 2015

widespread in science and technology, to the point that nowadays they are rou-
tinely used in industry and academia to understand, predict, and design proper-
ties of complex materials and devices. This success is also demonstrated by the
fact that 12 out of the top-100 most cited papers in the entire scientiﬁc literature
worldwide deal with quantum simulations using density-functional theory [1].
The availability of robust codes based on these accurate physical models, the
sustained increase in high-performance computational (HPC) capacity, and the
appearance of curated materials databases has paved the way for the emergence
of the model of materials design and discovery via high-throughput computa-
tions (see Refs. [2, 3, 4], and Ref. [5] for the literature cited therein). In some
realizations of this paradigm many diﬀerent materials (taken from experimental
or computational databases) and their properties are screened for optimal per-
formance. This type of work requires to automate the computational engines in
order to run thousands of simulations or more.
The challenge of automating and managing the simulations and the resulting
data creates the need for a dedicated software infrastructure. However, a practi-
cal implementation of a ﬂexible and general tool is challenging, because it must
address two contrasting requirements. On one hand it must be ﬂexible enough to
support diﬀerent tasks. On the other hand, it must require minimal eﬀort to be
used. While addressing these opposite requirements, two additional challenges
should be tackled: ensuring reproducibility of simulations, and encouraging the
creation of a community to share and cross-validate results. Regarding the for-
mer, even nowadays many scientiﬁc computational papers do not provide all the
details needed to reproduce the results. As for the latter, a common suggestion
to encourage sharing is to create uniﬁed central databanks of computed results,
where users can contribute their data [6, 7, 8, 9, 10, 11, 12, 13, 14, 15, 16]. How-
ever, the bulk of these repositories comes often from the group initiating the
database. One reason could be that researchers do not perceive the beneﬁts of
sharing data in a competitive academic or commercial environment. The main
obstacle, though, is that even researchers who are willing to contribute do not
have the ability or the time to easily collect their own data, convert these to
another format, ﬁlter and upload them.
With these considerations in mind, we developed AiiDA, an Automated In-
teractive Infrastructure and Database for computational science. Using AiiDA,
the users can access transparently both local and remote computer resources.
The platform is easy to use thanks to a high-level python scripting interface and
can support diﬀerent codes by means of a plugin interface. A central goal of
AiiDA is the full reproducibility of calculations and of the resulting data chain,
that we obtain by a tight coupling of storage and workﬂow automation. Data
analysis and querying of heterogeneous results and of the provenance relation-
ships are made possible and eﬀective by a database design based on directed
acyclic graphs and targeted towards data management for high-throughput sim-
ulations. Sharing of scientiﬁc knowledge is addressed by making it easy to setup
and manage local repositories driven by the interests of a given group, but pro-
viding tools to seamlessly share not only the data itself, but also the full scientiﬁc
workﬂows used to generate the results.
2

Figure 1: The four pillars of the proposed infrastructure for computational science. At the
lower level, an automation framework and an eﬃcient data management solution are needed.
At the user level, a high-level environment is coupled with a social ecosystem to stimulate the
sharing of codes, data and workﬂows.
In this paper, we ﬁrst discuss in more detail the general requirements that
any infrastructure should have to create, manage, analyze and share data and
simulations. These requirements are summarized in the four pillars of the ADES
model (Automation, Data, Environment, and Sharing). We then describe in
detail how these have been addressed by the current open-source implementation
of AiiDA, starting from Sec. 4 (one section per pillar).
2. The ADES model for computational science
The aim of this section is to introduce and illustrate the ADES model (see
Fig. 1), in order to motivate our design choices for AiiDA and describe the
platform requirements.
The ﬁrst pillar, Automation, responds to the needs of abstracting away
the low-level tasks to prepare, submit, retrieve and store large numbers of cal-
culations. It can be subdivided into the following main items:
• Remote management Large computations are typically prepared on a
user’s workstation and executed on HPC clusters. The diﬀerent steps of
job preparation, submission, status check, and results retrieval are repet-
itive and independent of the speciﬁc simulation tool. Therefore, remote
management tasks can be abstracted into an Application Programming
Interface (API) and automated. Diﬀerent communication and scheduler
implementations can be supported by plugins, all adopting the same API,
as we discuss in Sec. 4.2.
• Coupling to data Full reproducibility of calculations requires a tight
coupling of automation and storage. Decoupling these two aspects leaves
the researcher with the error-prone task of manually uploading calculation
3

inputs and outputs to a suitable repository, with the additional risk of
providing incomplete information. Instead, if the repository is populated
ﬁrst by the user with all the information needed to run the simulation,
the process of creating the input ﬁles and running the calculation can be
automated and easily repeated. The resulting repositories are therefore
necessarily consistent; moreover, almost no user intervention is required to
create direct pipelines to shared repositories, as the data is already stored
coherently.
• High-throughput The main advantage of automation is obtained in sit-
uations when screening or parameter sweeps are required, involving thou-
sands of calculations or more. Running and managing them one by one
is not feasible. Having a high-level automation framework opens the pos-
sibility to run multiple calculations simultaneously, analyze and ﬁlter the
results.
The infrastructure must be able to deal with potential errors
arising during the computations, trying to automatically recognize and
remedy these whenever possible.
The second pillar, Data, concerns the management of the data produced by
the simulations and covers the following three core areas:
• Storage HPC calculations produce a large amount of heterogeneous data.
Files containing input parameters and ﬁnal results need to be automat-
ically and permanently stored for future reference and analysis. On the
other hand, much of the data is required only temporarily (e.g., for check-
pointing) and can be discarded at the end of the simulation. Therefore,
a code-dependent ﬁle-storage policy (optionally customizable by the user)
must be adopted to categorize each output ﬁle. Anyhow, the existence
of intermediate ﬁles should be recorded, so that the logical ﬂow of cal-
culations is persisted even when restart ﬁles are deleted. If the platform
ensures reproducibility of calculations, it is straightforward to regenerate
the intermediate ﬁles, if needed. It is also important to store information
on the codes that generated the data. If ultimate reproducibility is needed,
one could envision to store reference virtual machines or Docker [17] im-
ages with the code executables.
• Provenance To achieve reproducibility, the platform needs to store and
represent the calculations that are executed, together with their input
data.
An eﬀective data model, though, should not only put emphasis
on calculations and data, but also keep track of the causal relationships
between them, i.e., the full provenance of the results.
For instance, a
ﬁnal relaxed crystal structure is of limited use without knowing how it
was obtained.
The natural data structure to represent the network of
relations between data and calculations is a directed acyclic graph, as we
will motivate in greater detail in Sec. 4.1.
• Database Today’s typical computational work environment consists of
a multitude of ﬁles with arbitrary directory structures, naming schemes
4

and lacking documentation.
In practice, it is hard to understand and
use the information (even by the author after some time) and to retrieve
a speciﬁc calculation when many are stored.
A database can help in
organizing results and querying them. The implementation of the data
model discussed above, based on directed acyclic graphs, must not be
restricted to a speciﬁc application, but has to accommodate heterogeneous
data. It must be possible to eﬃciently query any attribute (number, string,
list, dictionary, . . . ) associated to a graph node. Queries that traverse the
graph to assess causal relationships between nodes must also be possible.
A graph database backend is not required if the requirements above are
satisﬁed. For instance, AiiDA’s backend is a relational database with a
transitive-closure table for eﬃcient graph-traversal (see Secs. 5.2 and 5.3).
The ﬁrst two pillars described above address mainly low-level functionalities.
The next two pillars deal instead with user-oriented features. In particular, the
pillar Environment focuses on creating a natural environment for computa-
tional science, and involves the following aspects:
• High-level workspace As the researcher’s objective is to make new dis-
coveries and not to learn a new code, the infrastructure should be ﬂexible
and straightforward to use. For instance, while databases oﬀer many ad-
vantages in data-driven computational science, few scientists are expert in
their administration. For this reason, the intricacies of database manage-
ment and connections must be hidden by the an API abstraction layer.
Furthermore, by adopting a widespread high-level programming language
(such as Python) one can beneﬁt of mature tools for inserting and re-
trieving data from databases [18, 19, 20]. The infrastructure must also
be modular: a core providing common low-level functionalities, and cus-
tomizable plugins to support diﬀerent codes.
• Scientiﬁc workﬂows Much of the scientiﬁc knowledge does not merely lie
in the ﬁnal data, but in the description of the process, i.e., the “scientiﬁc
workﬂow” used to obtain them. If these processes can be encoded, then
they can be reused to compute similar quantities in diﬀerent contexts. A
workﬂow speciﬁes a dependency tree between calculation steps, that may
not be deﬁned at the start, but depend on intermediate results (e.g., an
iterative convergence with an unpredictable number of iterations). There-
fore, the infrastructure should automatically generate dependent calcula-
tions only when their inputs are available from earlier steps, evaluating
dependencies at run-time. The integration of the scientiﬁc workﬂows with
the other infrastructure pillars helps the users to focus on the workﬂow
logic rather than on the details of the remote management. As an addi-
tional beneﬁt, the automatic storage of the provenance during execution
provides an implicit documentation of the logic behind the results.
• Data analytics Application-driven research has the necessity of using
dozens of diﬀerent tools and approximations.
Nevertheless, results ob-
5

tained with diﬀerent codes often require the same post-processing or vi-
sualization algorithms. These data types (e.g., crystal structures or band
structures) should be stored in the same common format.
The infras-
tructure can then either provide data analytics capabilities to perform
operations on them, or even better facilitate the adoption of existing li-
braries. This result can be achieved by providing interfaces to external
tools for data processing and analytics (e.g. [21, 22] for crystal structures),
regardless of the speciﬁc simulation code used to generate the data.
The fourth pillar, Sharing, envisions the creation of a social ecosystem to
foster interaction between scientists, in particular for sharing data, results and
scientiﬁc workﬂows:
• Social ecosystem The envisioned framework should be an enabling tech-
nology to create a social ecosystem in computational research. Data access
policies must be considered with great care. Researchers prefer at times to
keep their data private (while protecting information in pending patents
or unpublished data), but sharing with collaborators or on a public reposi-
tory should occur with minimal eﬀort, when desired. Beside data sharing,
a standardized plugin interface should be provided. Plugin repositories
can be set up, to which users can contribute to share workﬂows, handlers
for new data formats, or support for new simulations codes. By this mech-
anism, scientists will be able to engage in social computing, parallel to the
developments in the mobile app and web ecosystems.
• Standardization In order to facilitate data exchange, standard formats
should be agreed upon and adopted for data sharing (e.g. [23]). Even when
multiple standards exist, a hub-and-spoke conﬁguration can be envisaged,
where each new code has the task to provide the data in an established
format. On the other hand, it is important that suitable ontologies are
deﬁned (i.e., simplifying, the names and physical units of the quantities to
store in a given repository, together with their meaning). Ontologies are
ﬁeld-speciﬁc and their deﬁnition must be community-driven (an example
of an ongoing eﬀort is the TCOD [24] database). The infrastructure can
be useful in this respect both as an inspiration for the ontology, and as a
testing environment containing a set of simulated use cases.
• Repository pipelines As more repositories emerge, it is important to de-
velop the ability to import or export data directly, either through REST
interfaces or via suitably deﬁned protocols.
If formats and ontologies
are established, the platform must simply convert the data and its prove-
nance in the speciﬁed format. Contributing to external databases becomes
straightforward and the platform becomes a facilitator for the creation of
shared repositories.
3. The AiiDA infrastructure
The ADES model described in the previous section aims at deﬁning an inte-
grated infrastructure for automating, storing, managing and sharing simulations
6

and their results. Until now, we discussed the model at an abstract level, so as
to highlight the generality of the requirements. In order to provide researchers
with an eﬀective tool to manage their eﬀorts, we developed a Python infras-
tructure (“AiiDA”, http://www.aiida.net) that is distributed open-source. In
the following, we describe the implementation details of AiiDA, with particular
emphasis on how the requirements of Sec. 2 have been met.
We start by outlining the architecture of AiiDA, schematically represented
in Fig. 2. AiiDA has been designed as an intermediate layer between the user
and the HPC resources, where automation is achieved by abstraction.
The core of the code is represented by the AiiDA API, a set of Python classes
that expose to the user an intuitive interface to interact with the main AiiDA
objects — calculations, codes and data — hiding the inhomogeneities of diﬀerent
supercomputers or data storage solutions. The key component of the API is the
Object–Relational Mapper (ORM), a layer that maps AiiDA storage objects
into python classes. Using the ORM, these objects can be created, modiﬁed
and queried via a high-level interface which is agnostic of the detailed storage
solution or of the SQL query language. The details of the storage, composed of
both a relational database and a ﬁle repository, are discussed in Sec. 5.
The user interacts with AiiDA in diﬀerent ways: using the command line
tool verdi, via the interactive python shell, or directly through python scripts
(more details in Sec. 6.3). Most components are designed with a plugin archi-
tecture (Sec. 6.2). Examples of features that can be extended with new plugins
include the support of new simulation codes, management of new data types,
and connection to remote computers using diﬀerent job schedulers.
4. Automation in AiiDA
4.1. The AiiDA daemon
The daemon is one important building block of AiiDA: it is a process that
runs in the background and handles the interaction with HPC clusters (selecting
the appropriate plugins for the communication channels — like SSH — or for
the diﬀerent job schedulers, see Sec. 4.2 below) and takes care of all automation
tasks. Once the daemon is started, it runs in the background, so that users
can even log out from their accounts without stopping AiiDA. Internally, it uses
celery [25] and supervisor [26] to manage asynchronous tasks.
The fundamental role of the daemon is to manage the life cycle of single cal-
culations. The management operations are implemented in the aiida.execmanager
module and consists in three main tasks: 1) submission of a new job to a remote
computer, 2) veriﬁcation of the remote job scheduler state, and 3) retrieval and
parsing of the results after a job completion. These steps are run independently.
If several calculations are running on the same machine, they are grouped in
order to open only one remote connection and avoid to overload the remote
cluster.
The user can follow the evolution of a calculation without connecting directly
to the remote machine by checking the state of a calculation, an attribute that
7

Figure 2: The main components of the AiiDA infrastructure and their interactions. The core
AiiDA component is the API, whose ORM represents stored objects as python classes. AiiDA
supports any computational code and data type via a plugin interface. The AiiDA daemon is
a background process that takes care of most automated operations such as job submission,
scheduler state check, ﬁle retrieval and parsing.
It interacts with the remote clusters via
diﬀerent channels (local, ssh, . . . ) using the appropriate scheduler plugins.
is stored in the database and is constantly updated by the daemon. In particu-
lar, every calculation is initialized in a NEW state. A call to the calc.submit()
method brings calc to the TOSUBMIT state. As soon as the daemon discov-
ers a new calculation with this state, it performs all the necessary operations
to submit the calculation and then sets the state to WITHSCHEDULER. Periodi-
cally, the daemon checks the remote scheduler state of WITHSCHEDULER calcu-
lations and, at job completion, the relevant ﬁles are automatically retrieved,
parsed and saved in the AiiDA storage.
Finally, the state of the calcula-
tion is set to FINISHED, or FAILED if the parser detects that the calculation
did not complete correctly. Beside the aforementioned states, other transition
states exist (SUBMITTING, RETRIEVING, PARSING) as well as states to identify
failures occurred in speciﬁc states (SUBMISSIONFAILED, RETRIEVALFAILED and
PARSINGFAILED).
4.2. Transports and schedulers
As discussed in the “Remote management” section of the “Automation” pil-
lar, in AiiDA we deﬁne an abstract API layer with methods to connect and com-
municate with remote computers and to interact with the schedulers. Thanks
to this API, the internal AiiDA code and the user interface are independent of
the type of connection protocol and scheduler that are actually used.
The generic job attributes valid for any scheduler (wall clock time, maximum
required memory, name of the output ﬁles, ...) are stored in a common format.
8

For what concerns schedulers, early work in the speciﬁcation of a middleware
API has been done in the Open Grid Forum [27] with, e.g., the DRMAA [28] and
the SAGA APIs, and similar eﬀorts have been done by the UNICORE [29] and
gc3pie [30] projects. In AiiDA, we have taken inspiration from these eﬀorts. We
provide appropriate plugins to convert the abstract information to the speciﬁc
headers to be written at the top of the scheduler submission ﬁle. Moreover,
the plugins provide methods that specify how to submit a new job or how to
retrieve the job state (running, queued, . . . ). Plugins for the most common
job schedulers (Torque [31], PBS Professional [32], SLURM [33], SGE or its
forks [34]) are already provided with AiiDA.
The scheduler plugins and the daemon, then, rely on the transport compo-
nent to perform the necessary remote operations (ﬁle copy and transfer, com-
mand execution, . . . ). Also in this case, we have deﬁned an abstract API speci-
fying the standard commands that should be available on any transport channel
(connection open and close, ﬁle upload and download, ﬁle list, command execu-
tion, . . . ). Plugins deﬁne the speciﬁc implementation. With AiiDA, we provide
a local transport plugin, to be used if AiiDA is installed on the same cluster
on which calculations will be executed. This plugin performs directly command
execution and ﬁle copy using the os and shutil Python modules. We also pro-
vide a ssh transport plugin to connect to remote machines using an encrypted
and authenticated SSH channel, and SFTP for ﬁle transfer. In this case, AiiDA
relies on paramiko [35] for the Python implementation of the SSH and SFTP
protocols.
The appropriate plugins to be used for each of the conﬁgured computers
are speciﬁed only once, when user conﬁgures for the ﬁrst time a new remote
computer in AiiDA.
5. Data in AiiDA: database, storage and provenance
5.1. The data model in AiiDA
The core concept of the AiiDA data model, partially inspired by the Open
Provenance Model [36], is that any calculation acts as a function (with the
meaning this word has in mathematics or in a computer language), performing
some manipulation on a set of input data to produce new data as output.
We thus represent each fundamental object, Calculation and Data, as a
node in a graph. These nodes can be connected together with directional and
labeled links to represent input and output data of a calculation. Direct links
between Data nodes are not allowed: any operation (even a simple copy) con-
verting data objects to other data objects is a function and must thus be rep-
resented by an intermediate Calculation node. We deﬁne for convenience a
third fundamental object, the Code, representing the executable ﬁle that is run
on the HPC resource. Each Calculation has therefore a set of Data nodes and
a Code node as input (Fig. 3). As the output Data nodes can in turn be used as
input of new calculations, we are eﬀectively modeling a Directed Acyclic Graph
(DAG) representing the chain of relationships between the initial data (e.g., a
crystal structure from an experimental database) and the ﬁnal results (e.g., a
9

diamond
alat = 3.5
StructureData
/home/.../pw.x
@daint.cscs.ch
Code
LDA pesudo
Carbon
UpfData
cutoff = 50Ry
...
ParameterData
MP Grid
6x6x6
KPoints
in_structure
diamond
alat = 3.7
StructureData
energy = -8Ry
...
ParameterData
walltime = 1h
PwCalculation
in_parameters
k_points
in_structure
out_parameters
out_structure
Figure 3: A simple example of how a calculation, the executable code and input/output
data are represented as nodes in a graph.
Labeled links between nodes represent logical
relationships: either inputs or outputs.
The code in input of a calculation represents the
executable that is launched. In this example, a Quantum ESPRESSO code is used to relax
a diamond crystal, using further parameters as input nodes (cutoﬀs, a mesh of k−points, a
pseudopotential in UPF format for carbon, . . . ). In output, two nodes are produced: a list of
result parameters (e.g., the total energy) and an output relaxed structure. This node can in
turn be used as input of new calculations.
luminescence spectrum) through all the intermediate steps that are required
to obtain the ﬁnal result: the provenance information of the data is therefore
saved. (The graph is acyclic because links represent a causal connection, and
therefore a loop is not allowed.)
5.2. The AiiDA database
Given that AiiDA represents data in terms of DAGs, we need to choose an
eﬃcient way to save them on disk. The objects we need to store are the nodes
and the links between them. Each node needs to contain all the information
describing it, such as lists of input ﬂags, sets of parameters, list of coordinates,
possibly some ﬁles, etc. Therefore, the actual implementation must support
the storage of arbitrary lists of ﬁles, and of attributes in the form key=value
(of diﬀerent types: strings, numbers, lists, . . . ) associated to each node. One
simple solution could consist in storing one ﬁle per node, containing all node
attributes in a suitable format, and then store all the links in another ﬁle.
However, this storage type is clearly not eﬃcient for querying, because in the
absence of a suitable indexing system every search requires disk access to each
ﬁle.
A database, instead, can speed up queries signiﬁcantly.
To have a net
beneﬁt however, the database must be suitably conﬁgured for the speciﬁc type
of data and queries that are most likely expected. Moreover, diﬀerent database
solutions exist, each of them tailored to speciﬁc types of data.
In this section, we discuss only the details of the storage solution imple-
mented in AiiDA, and we defer to Appendix A.1 a discussion on database types
(e.g. SQL vs. NoSQL) and on the reasons for our implementation choices. After
benchmarking diﬀerent solutions, we have chosen to adopt a SQL backend for
the AiiDA database. In particular, MySQL [37] and PostgreSQL [38] are fully
supported, together with the ﬁle-based backend SQLite [39] (even if the latter
10

Figure 4:
The most relevant tables of the AiiDA database schema. The DbNode table contains
an entry for each node, with only a limited set of columns such as the ID (or primary key, PK),
a string identifying the type of node (Calculation, Data, Code, or a subclass), the creation
date, and the owner (a foreign key to the DbUser table). All other attributes are stored in the
DbAttribute table, as described in the text. A third DbLink table stores all the links (each
link being identiﬁed by the PK of the input and output endpoints, and by a label). Other
tables exist in the database (to store computers, authorization information, comments, log
messages, groups, ...) typically referencing both to nodes and users (e.g., the comment of a
given user on a given node).
is not suited for multiple concurrent accesses, and its usage is limited to testing
purposes). The database is complemented by a ﬁle repository, where arbitrary
ﬁles and directories can be stored, useful for large amounts of data that do not
require direct querying, and is going to be discussed in details later in Sec. 5.4.
In our implementation, the three main pieces of information of the DAG (nodes,
links, and attributes) are stored in three SQL tables, as shown in Fig. 4.
The main table is called DbNode, where each entry represents a node in the
database. Only a few static columns are deﬁned: an integer identiﬁer (ID),
that is also the Primary Key (PK) of the table; a universally-unique identiﬁer
or UUID, a “type” string to identify the type of node (Calculation, Data,
Code, or one of their subclasses, see Sec. 6.1). A few more columns exist for
“universal” information such as a label, the creation and modiﬁcation time, and
the user who owns the node (a foreign link to the DbUser table, storing user
details).
A second table, DbLink, keeps track of all directional links between nodes.
Each entry contains the PKs of the input and output nodes of the link, and a
text ﬁeld for the link label, that distinguishes the diﬀerent inputs to a calculation
node (e.g., a crystal structure, a set of parameters, a list of k-points, etc.). For
instance, link names used for a Quantum ESPRESSO calculation can be seen
11

DbAttribute table
node_pk
key
value
num_cpus
7
48
queue_name
7
“private”
submission_time
7
May 2nd, 2014
13:46:07
energy
8
-13.736229
energy_units
8
“eV”
forces
8
[[4.32, 3.22, 0.73]],
[2.23, -1.46, 0.22], ...]
pk=7
Calc
pk=8
Results
Figure 5: Arbitrary attribute data in a SQL EAV table by means of our DbAttribute table.
This schema is simpliﬁed; the actual schema implemented in AiiDA is described in Appendix
A.1.
in Fig. 3.
A third table, DbAttribute, is used to store any possible attribute that
further characterizes each node.
Some examples of attributes could be: an
energy value, a string for the chemical symbol of each atom in a crystal structure,
a 3 × 3 matrix for the components of the crystal vectors, an integer specifying
the number of CPUs that we want to use for a given calculation, . . .
The DbAttribute table is schematically represented in Fig. 5. Each entry
represents one attribute of a node, and for each attribute we store: the PK of the
node to which this attribute belongs; the key, i.e. a string deﬁning the name
of the property that we want to store (e.g. “energy”, “atom symbols”, “lat-
tice vectors”, “num cpus”, . . . ); and the value of the given property. Internally,
the table has a more complicated schema allowing for extended ﬂexibility:
• Diﬀerent primitive data types can be stored (booleans, integers, real val-
ues, strings, dates and times, . . . )
• Arbitrary Python dictionaries (sets of key=value pairs) and lists can be
stored, and any element of the list or of the dictionary can be directly and
eﬃciently queried (even in case of multiple depth levels: lists of lists, lists
of dictionaries, . . . )
The technical description of the EAV table is deferred to Appendix A.1. We
emphasize here that by means of this table we achieve both ﬂexibility, by being
able to store many data types as an attribute, and preserving query eﬃciency,
since any element in the database can be queried directly at the database level
(making full use of indexes, etc.).
Since each row of the DbAttribute table is an internal property of a single
node, we enforce that attributes cannot be modiﬁed after the respective node has
12

been permanently stored (for example, we do not want the number of CPUs of
a calculation to be changed after the calculation has been stored and executed).
However, the user will often ﬁnd it useful to store custom attributes for later
search and ﬁltering (e.g., a tag specifying the type of calculation, the spacegroup
of a crystal structure, . . . ). To this aim, we provide a second table (DbExtra)
that is identical to the DbAttribute table (and therefore it has the same data
storage and querying capabilities). The content of the DbExtra table, though,
is not used internally by AiiDA, and is at complete disposal of the user.
Besides the three tables DbNode, DbLink and DbAttribute that constitute
the backbone of the database structure, there are a few other tables that help
data management and organization. The most relevant are:
• DbUser contains user information (name, email, institution).
• DbGroup deﬁnes groups of nodes to organize and gather together calcula-
tions belonging to the same project, pseudopotentials of the same type,
etc.
• DbComputer stores the list of remote computational resources that can be
used to run the simulations.
• DbAuthInfo stores the authorization information for a given AiiDA user
(from the DbUser table) to log in a given computer (from the DbComputer
table), like the username on the remote computer, etc.
• DbWorkflow, DbWorkflowData, DbWorkflowStep are the tables that store
workﬂow-related information.
• DbPath is the transitive closure table, described in the next section.
5.3. Graph database: querying the provenance
An example of a simple graph that can be stored in AiiDA is shown in Fig. 6,
where four diﬀerent calculations have been run with diﬀerent inputs producing
a set of output results, and where some output nodes have been used as input
of new calculations. Using the database data model described in the previous
section, we can store DAGs with arbitrary queryable attributes associated to
each node. However, there is another type of query speciﬁc to graph databases,
related to the graph connectivity: given two nodes, to determine the existence of
a path connecting them. This is particularly relevant for simulations in Materi-
als Science: typical queries involve searching for crystal structures with speciﬁc
computed properties, but the number of intermediate steps (i.e., Calculation
nodes) between a structure data node and the ﬁnal result can be large and
not even predictable (e.g., if multiple restarts are required, . . . ). This type of
searches requires in practice to query the provenance of the data in the database.
Sophisticated and eﬃcient graph traversal techniques have been developed
to discover the existence of a path between two nodes, and graph databases
(e.g., Neo4j [40]) implement these functions at the database level, however they
require the use of custom querying languages. Instead, we address the graph
13

Figure 6:
A schematic example of a possible graph inside the AiiDA database. An initial
crystal structure (blue node on the top of the ﬁgure) is used both for a total energy calculation
(SCF) and for a structural relaxation calculation (Relax). Each calculation has a set of input
parameters (orange dots) and of output results (dark green dots). The relaxation calculation
also produces another crystal structure, used as input for a new SCF calculation. Moreover,
the two structures in the graph are both taken as input from a calculation that computes a
suitably-deﬁned “distance” between them.
traversal problem within a SQL database by incrementally evaluating a transi-
tive closure table (that we called DbPath). This table lists the “paths”, i.e., all
pair of nodes (“parent” and “child”) that are connected together in the graph
through a chain of links. The table is automatically updated every time a link is
added, updated or removed from the DbLink table, by means of database trig-
gers that we have developed for the three supported backends (SQLite, MySQL
and PostgreSQL). The algorithm for the update of the transitive closure table
has been inspired by Ref. [41] and is described in detail in Appendix A.2.
Obviously, the DbPath table allows for fast queries on the data “history”,
at the expense of occupying additional disk space for its storage.
The size
of the table can in general become very large; however, in Material Science
applications, we typically do not have a single dense graph where all nodes are
interconnected; instead, one often creates many small graphs of the type of
Fig. 6. This means that the size of the DbPath table will remain roughly linear
in the number of nodes in the graph.
After benchmarking, we have chosen
the solution described above as a good compromise between storage and query
eﬃciency.
5.4. Database vs. ﬁle repository
The storage of attributes in the database discussed previously allows for
query eﬃciency, at the price of disk space (for additional information like in-
14

dexes, data types, ...) and of eﬃciency in regular operations (retrieving a large
list from the database is slower than retrieving a ﬁle containing the same list).
For large matrices, therefore, a threshold exists above which the advantages of
faster query speed are not justiﬁed anymore. Moreover, the single entries of a
large matrix (like the electron charge density discretised on a grid) are often of
little interest for direct querying. In such cases it is convenient to store data in
a ﬁle and rely on the ﬁle system for I/O access. This is especially appropriate
when the data should be used as an input to another calculation and a fast read
access is required.
For these reasons, AiiDA complements the database storage with a ﬁle repos-
itory (see Fig. 2), conﬁned within a folder conﬁgured during the setup phase
of AiiDA. Every time a new node is created, AiiDA automatically creates a
subfolder for the speciﬁc node. Any ﬁle, if present, associated with the node
will be stored therein.
Storing information as ﬁles or in the database is left as a choice for the
developers of the speciﬁc subclass of the Data of Calculation nodes (plugins
are discussed in Sec. 6.1), but in order to maximize eﬃciency, it should follow
the guideline discussed above. Some examples of the choices made for some
AiiDA Data plugins can be found in Sec. 6.2.
6. The scientiﬁc environment in AiiDA
6.1. The ORM
AiiDA is written in Python, a powerful object-oriented language. The ma-
terials simulation community has been moving towards Python in recent years,
due to its simplicity and the large availability of libraries for visualization, text
parsing, and scientiﬁc data processing [10, 21, 42]. An important component
of the AiiDA API is the Object-Relational Mapper (ORM), which exposes to
the user only a very intuitive Python interface to manage the database. The
main class of the AiiDA ORM, Node, is used to represent any node in the graph.
Each instance of the Node class internally uses Django to perform database op-
erations, and complements it with methods for accessing the ﬁle repository. The
low-level interaction with the database uses the Django framework [18].
The main functionalities of the Node class are:
• It provides a direct access to the node attributes, accessible as a Python
dictionary by using the node.attrs() method. The method also properly
recreates lists and dictionaries that were stored in expanded format at the
database level (lists and dictionaries are not natively supported in the
chosen databases), as described in Appendix A.1. Similar methods allow
the user to read and write user-deﬁned attributes in the DbExtra table.
• It provides direct access to the repository folder containing the ﬁles asso-
ciated to each Node.
• It provides a caching mechanism that allows the user to create and use
the Node even before storing it in the database or on the repository folder,
15

by keeping the ﬁles in a temporary sandbox folder, and the attributes in
memory. This is particularly useful to test the generation of the input
ﬁles by AiiDA without the need to store test data in the database. Only
after the node.store() call, all the data is permanently stored in the
AiiDA database and repository and no further modiﬁcations are allowed.
A similar caching mechanism has also been implemented to keep track of
links between nodes before storing.
• It provides an interface for querying nodes with speciﬁc attributes or with
speciﬁc attribute values, or nodes with given inputs or outputs, etc.
• It provides methods (.inp and .out) to get the list of inputs and outputs
of a node and similarly the list of all parent and child nodes using the
transitive closure table.
6.2. The plugin interface
To support a new type of calculation or a new kind of data (e.g. a band
structure, a charge density, a set of ﬁles, a list of parameters, . . . ), one simply
needs to write an AiiDA plugin. A plugin is simply a python module ﬁle, con-
taining the deﬁnition of a subclass of the AiiDA classes, sitting in an appropriate
folder; AiiDA automatically detects the new module and uses it.
All diﬀerent types of nodes are implemented as subclasses of the Node class.
At a ﬁrst subclass level we have the three main node types: Calculation, Code
and Data. Each of them is further subclassed by plugins to provide speciﬁc func-
tionalities. In particular, instances of Code represent a speciﬁc executable ﬁle
installed on a given machine (in the current implementation, there are no further
subclasses). Each subclass of Calculation, instead, supports a new simulation
software and contains the code needed to generate the software-speciﬁc input
ﬁles starting from the information stored in the AiiDA database. Moreover, it
can also provide a set of software-dependent methods (like calc.restart(),
. . . ) that make it easier for the user to perform routine operations. Finally, the
Data class has a subclass for each diﬀerent type of data that the user wants to
represent. The speciﬁc subclass implementation determines the possible user
operations on the data, and whether the information is going to be stored in
the database as attributes or in the ﬁle repository. We report here a description
of some of the most relevant Data subclasses distributed with AiiDA:
• ArrayData: it is used to store (large) arrays. Each array is stored on disk
as a binary, portable, compressed ﬁle using the Python numpy module [43].
Some attributes are stored in the DbAttribute table for fast querying (like
the array name and its size). Subclasses use the same storage model, but
deﬁne speciﬁc methods to create and read the data (e.g., the KpointsData
class has methods to detect a structure cell, build the list of special k-
points in k space and create paths of k-points, suitable for plotting band
structures, using for instance the standard paths listed in Ref. [44]).
16

• ParameterData: it is used to store the content of a Python dictionary
in the database.
Each key/value pair is stored as an attribute in the
DbAttribute table, and no ﬁles are stored in the repository.
• RemoteData: this node represents a “link” to a directory on a remote
computer. It is used for instance to save a reference to the scratch folder
on the remote computer in which the calculation was run, and acts as a
placeholder in the database to keep the full data provenance, for instance
if a calculation is restarted using the content of that remote folder. No
ﬁles are written in the AiiDA repository, but the remote directory absolute
path is stored as an attribute.
• FolderData: this node represents a folder with ﬁles. At variance with
RemoteData, ﬁles are stored permanently in the AiiDA repository (e.g.,
the outputs of a ﬁnished calculation retrieved from the remote computer).
• StructureData: this node represents a crystal structure. The 3 × 3 coor-
dinates of the lattice vectors, the list of atoms and their coordinates, and
any other information (atomic masses, . . . ) are saved as attributes for easy
querying. (For very large structures, a diﬀerent data model may be more
eﬃcient.) Methods are provided for standard operations like getting the
list of atoms, setting their positions and masses, converting structures to
and from other formats (e.g. the Atoms class of the ASE Atomistic Simula-
tion Environment [21]), obtaining the structure from an external database
(like ICSD [45] or COD [46]), getting the spacegroup using SPGlib [42],
etc.
Finally, we emphasize that the plugin interface is not limited to the ORM,
and a similar plugin-based approach applies to other AiiDA components, like
the connection transport channel and the schedulers (as discussed in Sec. 4.2).
6.3. User interaction with AiiDA
We provide a few diﬀerent interfaces to interact with AiiDA. The most com-
monly used is the verdi command line utility. This executable exposes on the
command line a set of very common operations, such as performing the ﬁrst
installation; reconﬁguring AiiDA; listing or creating codes, computers and cal-
culations; killing a calculation; starting/stopping the daemon, . . . The verdi
tool is complemented by a Bash completion feature to provide suggestions on
valid commands by pressing the TAB key. Moreover, an inline help provides a
list of existing commands and a brief description for each of them. The advan-
tage of verdi is to expose basic operations to the user without requiring any
knowledge of Python or other languages.
In order to access the full AiiDA API, however, the best approach is to write
Python scripts. The only diﬀerence with respect to standard python scripts is
that a special function aiida.load dbenv() needs to be called at the beginning
of the ﬁle to instructs Python to properly load the database. Once this call has
been made, any class from the aiida package can be loaded and used. If the
17

users do not want do explicitly call the aiida.load dbenv() call in the python
code, then they can run the script using the verdi run command.
In this
case, the AiiDA environment and some default AiiDA classes are automatically
loaded before executing the script.
A third interface is the interactive python shell that can be loaded us-
ing the command verdi shell. The shell is based on IPython [47] and has
the advantage to automatically load the database environment; at the same
time, it already imports by default some of the most useful classes (e.g. Node,
Calculation, Data, Group, Computer, . . . ) so that they are directly available
to the user. TAB completion is available and very useful to discover methods
and attributes. Moreover, the documentation of each class or method (written
as Python “docstrings”) is directly accessible.
6.4. Scientiﬁc workﬂows
As introduced in Sec. 2, many tasks in scientiﬁc research are standard and
frequently repeated, and typically require multiple steps to be run in sequence.
Common use cases are parameter convergence, restarts in molecular dynamics
simulations, multi-scale simulations, data-mining analysis, and other situations
when results of calculations with one code are used as inputs for diﬀerent codes.
In such cases, it is beneﬁcial to have a system that encodes the workﬂow and
manages its execution [48, 49, 50, 51, 52].
In order to fully integrate the workﬂows within the ADES model, we im-
plement a custom engine into AiiDA, by which the user can interact with all
AiiDA components via the API. This engine is generic and can be used to deﬁne
any computational workﬂow. Speciﬁc automation schemes, crafted for selected
applications (equation of states, phonons, etc...) are implemented within each
workﬂow and can be developed directly by the users.
AiiDA workﬂows are subdivided into a number of steps. One or more calcu-
lations can be associated to each step; these are considered to be independent
and are launched in parallel. Instead, diﬀerent steps are executed sequentially
and the execution order is speciﬁed by “forward” dependency relationships: In
other words, each “parent” step must specify the step to be executed next. The
execution of the “child” step is delayed until all calculations associated to the
parent have completed. We emphasize that dependency relationships are de-
ﬁned only between steps. Dependencies between calculations are implicit, with
the advantage of allowing for both parallel and serial simulation streams.
Within a step, beside creating calculations and associating them to the cur-
rent step, any other Python (and AiiDA) command can be executed. This gives
maximum ﬂexibility to deﬁne complex workﬂow logics, especially if the outputs
of a calculation in a parent step require some processing to be converted to the
new calculation inputs. Moreover, a step can deﬁne itself as the next step to be
executed, providing support for loops (even conditional ones, where the number
of iterations depends on the calculations results).
A key feature, modularity, completes AiiDA workﬂows: within each step, the
user can associate not only calculations, but also subworkﬂows. The advantage
is the possibility to reuse existing workﬂows that perform speciﬁc tasks, so as
18

to develop only missing features. For instance, let us assume that we developed
a workﬂow “A” that performs a DFT calculation implementing code-speciﬁc
restart and recover routines in order to make sure convergence is achieved. Then,
a workﬂow “B” that calculates the energy of a crystal at diﬀerent volumes (to
obtain its equation of state) does not need to reimplement the same logic, but
will just reuse “A” as a subworkﬂow. “B” can in turn become a subworkﬂow of
a higher-level workﬂow “C” that, for instance, compares the equation of state
calculated at diﬀerent levels of approximation. The combination of parallel and
serial execution, conditional loops, and modularity, makes the workﬂows general
enough to support any algorithm.
From the implementation point of view, the AiiDA workﬂow engine is pro-
vided by a generic Workflow class, that can be inherited to deﬁne a speciﬁc
workﬂow implementation. Workﬂow steps are special class methods identiﬁed
by the @step decorator.
The base class also provides dedicated methods to
associate calculations and workﬂows to the current step. In every step, a call
to the self.next() method is used to deﬁne dependencies between steps. This
method accepts as a parameter the name of the following step. The name is
stored in the database, and the corresponding method is executed by the daemon
only when all calculations and subworkﬂows of the current step have ﬁnished.
In analogy with calculations, AiiDA uses states to keep track of workﬂows
and workﬂow steps (RUNNING, FINISHED, . . . ).
The AiiDA daemon handles
all the workﬂow operations (submission of each calculation, step advancement,
script loading, error reporting, . . . ) and the transitions between diﬀerent work-
ﬂow states.
In the long term, we envision integrating into AiiDA many new and existing
methods in the form of workﬂows (e.g., training interatomic potentials [53],
crystal structure prediction algorithms [54, 55], . . . ), so that the researcher can
focus on materials science and delegate to AiiDA the management of remote
computers, the appropriate choice of code-speciﬁc parameters, and dealing with
code-speciﬁc errors or restarts.
6.5. Querying
A relevant aspect of a high-level scientiﬁc environment is the possibility of
running queries on the data stored in AiiDA without the need to know a speciﬁc
(and typically complex) query language.
To this aim, we have developed a
Python class, called the QueryTool, to specify in a high-level format the query
to run. For instance, it is possible to specify a ﬁlter on the node type (e.g.,
to get only crystal structures); to ﬁlter by the value of a speciﬁc attribute or
DbExtra table entry (e.g., to select structures with a speciﬁc spacegroup); or to
ﬁlter by a speciﬁc attribute in one of the linked nodes (e.g., to get structures
on which a total-energy calculation was run, and the energy was lower than
a given threshold). Queries can also take advantage of the transitive closure
table, setting ﬁlters on attributes of nodes connected to the one of interest by
an unknown number of intermediate links (e.g., if the result of the calculation
was obtained after an unknown number of restarts). As an example, a complex
query that can be run with AiiDA is: give me all crystal structures containing
19

Figure 7: The ﬁrst page of the AiiDA documentation. Diﬀerent sections are aimed at the end
users (with examples and tutorials) and at developers (with the documentation of classes and
methods, and tutorials for new plugin development).
iron and oxygen and with a cell volume larger than X ˚
A3, that I used as input
for a sequence of calculations with codes Y and Z to obtain the phonon band
structure, for which the lowest phonon frequency that was obtained is positive,
and for which the DFT exchange-correlation functional used was LDA. Other
complex queries can be speciﬁed using the QueryTool in a format that is easy
both to write and to read.
6.6. Documentation and unit testing
A key component of a productive scientiﬁc environment is a complete and
accurate code documentation. For this reason, AiiDA is complemented by an
extensive documentation. Each class, method and function has a Python doc-
string that describes what the function does, the arguments, the return val-
ues and the exceptions raised. These docstrings are accessible via the inter-
active shell, but are also compiled using the Sphinx [56] documentation en-
gine into a comprehensive set of HTML pages (see Fig. 7). These pages are
distributed with the code (in the docs/ subfolder) and also available online
at http://aiida-core.readthedocs.org. Moreover, we also provide in the
same format, using Sphinx, a complete user documentation of the diﬀerent
functionalities, supported databases, classes and codes, together with tutorials
covering the installation phase, the launch of calculations and workﬂows, data
analysis, . . . The user guide is also complemented by a developer’s guide that
documents the API and contains tutorials for the development of new plugins.
Moreover, to simplify the code maintenance, we implement a comprehensive
set of unit tests (using the Python unittest module), covering the diﬀerent
components of AiiDA described in Fig. 2.
7. Sharing in AiiDA
The fourth pillar introduced in Sec. 2 aims at enabling a social ecosystem
where it becomes easy to share tools and results, such as data, codes, and
20

workﬂows. In order to preserve the authorship and privacy of the data of each
researcher, we implemented a model in which each user or group of users can
install their own local AiiDA instance.
All data and calculations are acces-
sible only to people with direct access to the instance and therefore remain
private. In order to enable sharing of the database (or parts of it) with col-
laborators, we provide functionality to export a portion of the database to a
ﬁle, and then to import it in a diﬀerent instance of AiiDA. In this way sev-
eral groups in a collaboration may contribute to a common repository, open
to the entire project, while retaining their private portions as needed.
This
approach simpliﬁes issues of user- and group-level security. To avoid conﬂicts
during this procedure, AiiDA assigns a Universally Unique IDentiﬁer (UUID)
to each node as soon as it is locally created. In fact, while for internal database
usage an auto-incrementing integer PK is the most eﬃcient solution to refer to
a database row, the PK is not preserved when a node is transferred to a diﬀer-
ent database. Instead, the ﬁrst node to be created will always have PK=1, the
second PK=2, and so on. A UUID is instead a hexadecimal string that may
look like the following: e3d21365-7c55-4658-a5ae-6122b40ad04d. The speci-
ﬁcations for creating a UUID are deﬁned in RFC 4122 by IETF [57], and they
guarantee that the probability that two diﬀerent UUIDs generated in diﬀerent
space and time locations can be assumed to be zero. In this way, we can use the
UUID to identify the existence of a node in the DB; at import time, it is only
veriﬁed whether a node with the same UUID already exists before including its
contents in the database. We envision one or several centralized repositories,
available to the public, that collect results from diﬀerent groups. Researchers
will be able to share results with colleagues by exchanging just the UUID of the
nodes stored on the public repository, rather than sending actual scripts or ﬁles.
In this collaborative environment the adoption of new codes, the comparison of
results, and data disclosure and reproducibility become straightforward, real-
izing the “social ecosystem” discussed in Sec. 2 and facilitating the reusability
of data, codes and workﬂows. We emphasize that only after having a locally
deployed automation infrastructure like AiiDA it becomes feasible to populate
public repositories eﬃciently and in a uniform format, because the user eﬀort
to uniform the data, prepare it and upload it is reduced to the minimum.
The standardization of the formats produced by diﬀerent codes is necessary
to maximize the eﬀectiveness of data sharing. This task is outside the scope of
the AiiDA project, but we encourage existing and future standardization eﬀorts
by the developers of the simulation codes. At the same time, within AiiDA we
provide a set of “default” plugins for the most common data structures (crystal
structures, paths of k−points in reciprocal space, . . . ), which can be seamlessly
reused in diﬀerent codes. Implemented classes provide importers and exporters
from/to common ﬁle formats, so that it is possible to exchange the data also
with other infrastructures and repositories that use diﬀerent data formats. We
also emphasize that it is possible to write workﬂows that perform high-level
tasks common to a variety of codes, such as structure optimization or molecular
dynamics, even before a standardization of data formats takes place.
Moreover, to encourage the development of the repository pipelines discussed
21

in the “Sharing” pillar, we deﬁne in AiiDA a common API for importers and
exporters of crystal structures (in the aiida.tools package). Also in this case,
repositories can be supported by plugin subclasses; plugins for importing struc-
tures from some common databases, such as ICSD [45], COD [46], MPOD [58]
and TCOD [24] are already distributed with the code.
8. Codes and data types supported out of the box
In the ﬁrst stage of the development of AiiDA, we mainly focused on the in-
frastructure and its components (scheduler management, database, . . . ) rather
than writing a large number of plugins.
However, we already provide with AiiDA fully-functional plugins for most
codes of the Quantum ESPRESSO package [59], namely pw.x, ph.x, cp.x, and
many of the post-processing tools such as matdyn.x, q2r.x, . . . These plugins
expose the full functionality of the respective codes, and moreover include not
only the input generation routines, but also output parsers. The type and format
of the input nodes required by Quantum ESPRESSO is shown in Fig. 3 and
described in detail in the code documentation. We also provide a PwImmigrant
class to import pw.x calculations that were already run before the adoption of
AiiDA.
Similarly to calculations, the user can support new custom tailored data
types by deﬁning a new data format. However, to facilitate the standardization
of the most common data types, we provide with AiiDA a set of Data subclasses.
Some examples (already described in Sec. 6.2) include the StructureData for
crystal structures (supporting also non-periodic systems, vacancies and alloys),
the KpointsData for paths in k−space, the BandsData for band-structure data,
the ArrayData for generic arrays. Moreover, we also provide a speciﬁc class
to support pseudopotentials in the UPF format, that is the format used by
Quantum ESPRESSO. Speciﬁc routines allow the user to upload a single pseu-
dopotential, or a family of pseudopotentials into the database. At upload time,
the pseudopotentials are parsed to discover to which element they correspond,
and an attribute is added for later querying. Moreover, the MD5 checksum of
the ﬁle is calculated and stored, to avoid to store twice the same pseudopotential
in the database. The verdi data upf uploadfamily command can be used to
take all UPF ﬁles contained in a folder, possibly of the same type (e.g. ultrasoft
with PBE functional, . . . ) and group them in a “family”. In this way, when
running a Quantum ESPRESSO simulation, one can ask AiiDA to simply select
the appropriate pseudopotentials from a family, rather than manually selecting
the pseudopotentials one by one.
We include support also for other codes, in particular all the codtools [60],
a set of tools for processing, ﬁltering and correcting CIF ﬁles (the de-facto
standard format for crystal structures). Furthermore, a basic support to the
GPAW code [61] is provided and, since GPAW runs via the ASE interface [21],
the same plugin can be used to access a large family of simulation codes already
supported by ASE, like VASP, ABINIT, Gaussian, . . . The full list can be found
on the ASE webpage.
22

9. Examples of applications
In this section, we summarize some examples in the ﬁeld of materials science
in which AiiDA has already been used as the platform for managing simulations.
9.1. Veriﬁcation and validation
Tests for veriﬁcation and validation purposes can often be automated. One
typical example in the ﬁeld is the test of pseudopotentials for accuracy and
transferability.
AiiDA workﬂows can be developed to perform standardized
tests with minimal user intervention, as soon as a new pseudopotential ﬁle (or
family of pseudopotentials) is available. If a pseudopotential is discovered to
be inaccurate, one can easily ﬁnd and ﬂag all calculations that were performed
with it. One can then easily run again all aﬀected calculations with an improved
pseudopotential with minimal eﬀort, since each calculation stored in AiiDA is
reproducible and the provenance of the data is available.
As an example, we implemented a workﬂow (using Quantum ESPRESSO
as the simulation engine) to perform the Crystalline Monoatomic Solid Test
(CMST) with the 15-point protocol described in Ref. [62]. The workﬂow, start-
ing from an initial guess of the lattice parameter a0, iteratively reﬁnes the value
of a0 by ﬁtting a Birch–Murnaghan equation of state to 15 calculations per-
formed at diﬀerent volumes. An automatic restart procedure is implemented
as a subworkﬂow to automatically relaunch any calculation that crashed using
diﬀerent numerical parameters, as discussed in Sec. 6.4 (e.g. using a diﬀerent
initial guess for the wavefunctions or a diﬀerent convergence algorithm). We
have been able to reproduce the results for the PSlibrary [63] family of pseu-
dopotentials reported in Ref. [62], and we computed the same quantities also
for the GBRV pseudopotentials [64] using the suggested cutoﬀs (40 Ry for the
wavefunctions and 200 Ry for the charge density), a shifted 32×32×32 k−mesh
and a Marzari-Vanderbilt smearing [65] of 2 mRy. The results are reported in
Table 1.
9.2. New functional development
When developing new methods or functionals, one often needs to benchmark
multiple versions of a simulation code. It is crucial to record the code perfor-
mance and the data accuracy, besides the information needed to reproduce
results, in order to detect code errors and bypass bottlenecks. Moreover, para-
metric sweep tests are often performed on a set of training structures to collect
statistics for uncertainty quantiﬁcation analysis and to assess transferability of
new methods. As a practical example, AiiDA was used for the development and
veriﬁcation of the Koopmans-compliant functionals by Borghi et al. in Ref. [66].
9.3. High-throughput material screening
Automated workﬂows are commonly used for high-throughput materials
screening, for instance to explore the chemical composition space of a given
crystal structure by changing the elements that form the structure. As an ex-
ample, we are investigating ABO3 perovskites using automated workﬂows to
23

FCC
BCC
SC
Element
a0
B0
a0
B0
∆Efcc
a0
B0
∆Efcc
Ag
4.151
90.7
3.302
88.7
0.031
2.752
66.4
0.332
Ba
6.357
8.1
5.024
8.7
−0.017
3.955
7.8
0.287
Be
3.163
119.8
2.506
125.2
0.018
2.176
76.5
0.920
Ca
5.527
17.4
4.384
15.5
0.017
3.515
10.7
0.393
Cd
4.509
41.9
3.609
36.4
0.051
3.000
30.4
0.114
Co
3.452
257.7
2.760
242.8
0.255
2.281
186.6
0.864
Cr
3.625
236.6
2.850
257.4
−0.393
2.342
186.2
0.632
Cs
7.770
2.0
6.161
2.0
0.001
5.043
1.6
0.093
Cu
3.633
141.7
2.888
139.7
0.035
2.409
104.1
0.469
Fe
3.448
287.0
2.757
270.4
0.317
2.266
209.4
0.961
K
6.664
3.6
5.282
3.6
0.000
4.295
2.9
0.105
Li
4.325
13.8
3.435
13.9
0.002
2.732
12.2
0.121
Mg
4.524
35.2
3.580
35.4
0.016
3.022
22.7
0.367
Mn
3.505
279.7
2.785
278.1
0.079
2.284
211.9
0.862
Mo
4.000
238.0
3.160
258.8
−0.426
2.599
187.6
0.733
Na
5.293
7.7
4.198
7.7
0.000
3.412
6.1
0.119
Nb
4.216
164.1
3.309
172.2
−0.324
2.719
130.0
0.664
Ni
3.510
204.5
2.792
200.4
0.054
2.323
148.3
0.668
Pd
3.943
170.2
3.137
167.3
0.044
2.615
123.8
0.516
Rb
7.147
2.8
5.667
2.8
0.001
4.622
2.2
0.095
Rh
3.832
256.3
3.071
235.5
0.357
2.538
187.5
0.798
Ru
3.809
307.2
3.051
281.2
0.514
2.510
221.3
1.025
Sc
4.618
51.3
3.676
53.4
0.056
2.967
35.2
0.721
Sr
6.020
11.3
4.756
12.1
0.005
3.853
7.0
0.385
Tc
3.870
298.4
3.080
293.1
0.183
2.531
223.6
0.977
Ti
4.113
107.6
3.255
106.0
0.053
2.640
76.7
0.780
V
3.816
176.5
2.996
183.5
−0.244
2.448
136.8
0.607
Y
5.060
39.4
4.039
39.0
0.098
3.262
25.8
0.773
Zn
3.931
69.2
3.133
63.4
0.063
2.630
48.3
0.203
Zr
4.526
90.7
3.573
88.0
0.045
2.913
68.9
0.839
Table 1: Results of the fully automated CMST for the PBE GBRV v.1.2 pseudopotentials [64]
on 30 elemental solids in diﬀerent crystal structures, using the 15-point protocol of Ref. [62], as
implemented in our AiiDA workﬂow. ∆Efcc indicates the total energy diﬀerence between the
crystal structure under consideration (BCC or SC) and the FCC structure. Lattice parameters
a0 are in ˚A, bulk moduli B0 in GPa, energy diﬀerences in eV.
calculate ﬁnite-temperature properties in the quasi-harmonic approximation,
where intermediate steps include calculations of equations of state and phonon
spectra at diﬀerent volumes for every material.
9.4. Open repositories
Availability of open repositories is necessary for speeding up scientiﬁc discov-
eries and the development of new materials. The task of uploading calculations
to a repository and their reproducibility are made simple by AiiDA, because
provenance is captured in the data model. Therefore, it is straightforward to
create new cloud-based repositories of results for public access, or to upload
the results to existing open databases, like the TCOD [24], for which we de-
velop automated exporters for the computed structures as well as the full tree
of calculations that generated them.
24

10. Conclusions
In this paper we postulate and discuss the fundamental features required by
an infrastructure for computational science, summarized in the four pillars of
Automation, Data, Environment and Sharing. We then present the software
platform AiiDA (http://www.aiida.net), discussing in detail its implementation
and how these requirements are addressed. The core of the platform is repre-
sented by the AiiDA API, an abstract layer of Python custom inheritable classes
that exposes the user in an intuitive manner to the main AiiDA Calculation,
Data and Code objects.
Using the ORM, objects can be created, modiﬁed
and queried via a high-level interface which is agnostic of the detailed storage
solution or of the SQL query language.
Data, calculations and their results
are safeguarded in a tailored storage formed both by repository folders and an
SQL database (PostgreSQL, MySQL and SQLite are natively supported) with
a schema that supports storage and query of directed acyclic graphs and gen-
eral attributes (numbers, strings, lists, dictionaries). Heterogeneous data can
be accommodated thanks to the use of entity-attribute-value (EAV) tables, and
graph traversal is optimized by automatically updating a transitive-closure ta-
ble that can be directly queried to assess node connectivity. The tight coupling
of automation and storage enables data ﬂows to be tracked and safeguarded in
such a tailored solution. A ﬂexible workﬂow engine is made available for the
deﬁnition and execution of complex sequences of calculations, managed by a
daemon, without the need of direct user intervention. Implementation of mul-
tiple connection protocols let the software interact with remote computational
resources and submit calculations to diﬀerent job schedulers. A modular plugin
design allows for seamless integration of additional connection protocols and
schedulers, or the inclusion or extension to diﬀerent codes and computational
solutions. We believe that such platform will be key to enabling researchers to
accelerate their process in computational sciences, removing many of the error-
prone details and technicalities of the simulations, while supporting validation,
reproducibility, and ultimately an open-access model to computational eﬀorts.
Acknowledgments
The authors gratefully acknowledge help from multiple collaborators: Niko-
lai Zarkevich, Katharine Fang, Kenneth Schumacher, Wen Huang, Alexei Os-
sikine and Gopal Narayan for helping implement versions of an earlier infras-
tructure design; Christoph Koch for many useful discussions and for suggest-
ing the adoption of the transitive closure table; Nicolas Mounet for developing
Quantum ESPRESSO workﬂows and Andrius Merkys for developing import and
export functionality for repositories, in particular COD and TCOD, and both
for signiﬁcant improvements to the infrastructure; Eric Hontz for developing
import functionalities for existing Quantum ESPRESSO simulations and work-
ﬂows; Philippe Schwaller for the ICSD importer; Valentin Bersier for the Web
interface; Marco Dorigo for the implementation of the SGE scheduler plugin;
25

Giovanni Borghi, Ivano Castelli, Marco Gibertini, Leonid Kahle and Prateek
Mehta for acting as early beta-testers and for providing user feedback.
This work has been supported, in chronological order, by Robert Bosch LLC;
by the Laboratory of Theory and Simulation of Materials (THEOS); by the
Swiss National Centre for Competence in Research on “Computational Design
and Discovery of Novel Materials” (NCCR MARVEL); by computing resources
at the Oak Ridge Leadership Computing Facility at the Oak Ridge National
Laboratory, which is supported by the Oﬃce of Science of the U.S. Depart-
ment of Energy under Contract No. DE-AC05-00OR22725, within the INCITE
project with ID mat045; and by the Swiss National Supercomputing Centre
(CSCS) under project IDs THEOS s337, MARVEL mr1 and CHRONOS ch3.
Appendix A. The AiiDA storage implementation – technical details
Appendix A.1. Attributes in a EAV table
The most widespread databases are of the relational kind, based on the
Structured Query Language (SQL). In a SQL database, the information is stored
in a set of tables, where each entry is a row of the table, and each column is an
entry property. The number and type of columns is predeﬁned in the database
schema when the database is created, and is not changed during the database
usage. This requirement can be a strong limitation for applications that require
a variable set of properties to be stored. This has led to the development of
a number of database systems with diﬀerent underlying models for the data
storage; all these solutions fall under the generic name of NoSQL solutions (a
few popular examples include Cassandra [67], CouchDB [68], MongoDB [69],
Neo4j [40], but many more exist).
The ﬁnal choice of the backend depends on a tradeoﬀbetween usability,
storage speed and size, and query eﬃciency. These aspects strongly depend in
turn on the type of stored data and on the typically run queries. After comparing
diﬀerent solutions we decided to use a SQL backend with a suitably designed
schema for the two attributes tables (DbAttribute and DbExtra). These two
are modiﬁed Entity–Attribute–Value (EAV) tables. Beside the node pk column,
pointing to a node in the DbNode table, and the key column to store the name
of the attribute, we also have a few columns to store the attribute value. In
order to have eﬃcient queries, we decided to have one column for each of the
basic datatypes that we want to consider: boolean values, integers, reals, strings
and date/times. These ﬁve columns are complemented by a datatype column,
that can only assume a ﬁnite number of values and speciﬁes the type of data
stored in the speciﬁc entry. With this schema, in exchange of a few bytes of
extra information for each attribute, queries become eﬃcient (for instance by
indexing the columns we can easily ask the database backend to ﬁnd all nodes
that have a property with, e.g., key=“energy”, and value ≤−12.3).
Most
importantly, we achieved the main goal of being able to store any value in the
database in a dynamical way (i.e., we do not have to adapt the schema for each
new attribute that we want to store). Beside strings and numbers, we extended
the EAV table to store also date/times and the datatype None.
26

An important extension is the implementation of the storage of lists and
dictionaries. These two datatypes are common in the description of data inputs
or outputs of atomistic simulations (the list of atoms in a crystal structure,
the 3 × 3 components of the lattice vectors, . . . ). One solution (implemented
in AiiDA, but not used by default) is to serialize any list or dictionary in the
widespread JavaScript Object Notation (JSON) format as a string, store the
resulting string in the appropriate column of DbAttribute, and set the datatype
ﬁeld to a JSON value. However, the disadvantage of this approach is that it
becomes ineﬃcient to look for a speciﬁc value inside a list: the values are now
stored as strings, and a query that looks for a given value must loop through the
whole dataset (a task with O(n) complexity and, moreover, with a quite large
prefactor because each string must be deserialized – i.e., the JSON string needs
to be decoded). Moreover, date/times are not natively supported by JSON. We
instead deﬁned a schema that is able to store lists and dictionaries at any depth
(i.e. lists of lists, lists of dictionaries, dictionaries of lists, . . . ). We ﬁrst add two
new datatypes for lists and dictionaries, and we choose a separator symbol that
is reserved and cannot be used in key names (in the current implementation, a
dot). Then, for a dictionary with name the dict and values
{“value1” : 12, “value2” : “a string”}
we store three entries in the DbAttribute table:
key
datatype
int value
str value
the dict
dict
2
/
the dict.value1
int
12
/
the dict.value2
str
/
“a string”
The entry of type dict is needed to have the possibility to store also empty
dictionaries; the integer value is the number of elements in the dictionary, and
is useful both for consistency checks and to be able to eﬃciently ﬁlter dictionaries
of a given length. The key of the other entries are obtained joining the dictionary
name, the separator (a dot) and the key of the item. Lists are stored in a similar
way, where value1 and value2 are replaced by the integer positions in the list,
and of course the datatype is replaced from dict to list.
We emphasize here that this storage model for lists and dictionaries clearly
extends naturally to any depth level (that is, in the example above the dict.value2
could in turn be a dictionary, and its values would have entries with key the dict.value2.key1,
the dict.value2.key2, etc.)
Finally, we note here that while this storage
model is eﬃcient for storing and querying small lists, should not be used for
large arrays. In this case, a speciﬁc class (ArrayData, see 6.2) is available in
the AiiDA ORM for storing directly the array on the disk, rather than in the
database.
Appendix A.2. Algorithm for the update of the transitive closure table
Each entry of the transitive closure table represents the connectivity of two
nodes in the graph by means of a “path”, i.e., a sequence of links.
27

This table is automatically updated by database triggers, that need to be
ﬁred every time an entry is added, removed or modiﬁed in the table of links
(DbLink).
The algorithm that we implemented is the following. Every time a new link
from a node A to a node B is created, the transitive closure table is queried
to get all the parents of A and the children of B. Then, new paths are added,
connecting: A to B; each parent of A to B; A to each child of B; and each
parent of A to each child of B. Beside storing the PKs of the two nodes A and
B, each entry of the DbPath table has three more columns to store the PKs of
the three DbPath entries that were used in the creation of the path (the one
from the parent of A to A, the one from A to B, and the one from B to its
child; the ﬁrst and the third are set to the PK of the A →B path, if absent).
These three additional columns guarantee the possibility of implementing an
eﬃcient algorithm to update the transitive closure table not only on creation of
new links, but also in the case of link removal: without them, the whole table
would need to be regenerated from scratch at every deletion.
Bibliography
References
[1] R. Van Noorden, B. Maher, R. Nuzzo, Nature 514 (2014) 550.
[2] A. Franceschetti, A. Zunger, Nature 402 (1999) 60–63.
[3] G. H. J´ohannesson, T. Bligaard, A. V. Ruban, H. L. Skriver, K. W. Jacobsen,
J. K. Nørskov, Phys. Rev. Lett. 88 (2002) 255506–.
[4] S. Curtarolo, D. Morgan, K. Persson, J. Rodgers, G. Ceder, Phys. Rev. Lett. 91
(2003) 135503–.
[5] S. Curtarolo, G. L. W. Hart, M. B. Nardelli, N. Mingo, S. Sanvito, O. Levy, Nat.
Mater. 12 (2013) 191–201.
[6] P. Villars, M. Berndt, K. Brandenburg, K. Cenzual, J. Daams, F. Hulliger,
T. Massalski, H. Okamoto, K. Osaki, A. Prince, H. Putz, S. Iwata, Journal of
Alloys and Compounds 367 (2004) 293–297.
[7] N. Zarkevich, Complexity 11 (2006) 36–42.
[8] P. R. da Silveira, C. R. da Silva, R. M. Wentzcovitch, Comp. Phys. Comm. 178
(2008) 186–198.
[9] G. Yuan, F. Gygi, Computational Science & Discovery 3 (2010) 015004–.
[10] A. Jain, G. Hautier, C. J. Moore, S. Ping Ong, C. C. Fischer, T. Mueller, K. A.
Persson, G. Ceder, Comp. Mat. Sci. 50 (2011) 2295–2310.
[11] S. Adams, P. de Castro, P. Echenique, J. Estrada, M. D. Hanwell, P. Murray-Rust,
P. Sherwood, J. Thomas, J. Townsend, Journal of Cheminformatics 3 (2011) 38.
[12] S. Curtarolo, W. Setyawan, S. Wang, J. Xue, K. Yang, R. H. Taylor, L. J. Nelson,
G. L. Hart, S. Sanvito, M. Buongiorno-Nardelli, N. Mingo, O. Levy, Computa-
tional Materials Science 58 (2012) 227–235.
[13] D. Landis, J. Hummelshøj, S. Nestorov, J. Greeley, M. Du lak, T. Bligaard,
J. Nørskov, K. Jacobsen, Computing in Science & Engineering 14 (2012) 51–57.
[14] J. Saal, S. Kirklin, M. Aykol, B. Meredig, C. Wolverton 65 (2013) 1501–1509.
[15] http://www.eudat.eu/.
[16] http://www.nomad-repository.eu/.
28

[17] https://www.docker.com/.
[18] http://www.djangoproject.com/.
[19] http://www.sqlalchemy.org/.
[20] http://rubyonrails.org/.
[21] S. R. Bahn, K. W. Jacobsen, Comput. Sci. Eng. 4 (2002) 56–66.
[22] S. P. Ong, W. D. Richards, A. Jain, G. Hautier, M. Kocher, S. Cholia, D. Gunter,
V. L. Chevrier, K. A. Persson, G. Ceder, Comp. Mat. Sci. 68 (2013) 314–319.
[23] P. Murray-Rust, H. S. Rzepa, J. Chem. Inf. Comput. Sci. 43 (2003) 757–772.
[24] http://www.crystallography.net/tcod/.
[25] http://www.celeryproject.org/.
[26] http://supervisord.org/.
[27] http://www.ogf.org.
[28] P. Tr¨oger, H. Rajic, A. Haas, , P. Domagalski, in: Proceedings of the Seventh
IEEE International Symposium on Cluster Computing and the Grid (CCGrid
2007), Rio de Janeiro, Brazil, pp. 619–626. http://www.drmaa.org/.
[29] http://www.unicore.eu/.
[30] http://gc3pie.googlecode.com/.
[31] http://www.adaptivecomputing.com/products/open-source/torque/.
[32] http://www.pbsworks.com/Product.aspx?id=1.
[33] https://computing.llnl.gov/linux/slurm/.
[34] http://gridscheduler.sourceforge.net/.
[35] https://github.com/paramiko/paramiko.
[36] L. Moreau, B. Cliﬀord, J. Freire, J. Futrelle, Y. Gil, P. Groth, N. Kwasnikowska,
S. Miles, P. Missier, J. Myers, B. Plale, Y. Simmhan, E. Stephan, J. V. den
Bussche, Future Generation Computer Systems 27 (2011) 743–756.
[37] http://www.mysql.com/.
[38] http://www.postgresql.org/.
[39] http://www.sqlite.org/.
[40] http://www.neo4j.org/.
[41] G. Dong, L. Libkin, J. Su, L. Wong, Int. Journal of Information Technology 5
(1999) 46–78.
[42] http://spglib.sourceforge.net.
[43] S. van der Walt, S. C. Colbert, G. Varoquaux, Comput. Sci. Eng. 13 (2011) 22.
[44] W. Setyawan, S. Curtarolo, Computational Materials Science 49 (2010) 299–312.
[45] http://www.ﬁz-karlsruhe.com/icsd.html.
[46] S. Graˇzulis, A. Daˇskeviˇc, A. Merkys, D. Chateigner, L. Lutterotti, M. Quir´os,
N. R. Serebryanaya, P. Moeck, R. T. Downs, A. Le Bail, Nucleic Acids Research
40 (2012) D420–D427.
[47] F. P´erez, B. E. Granger, Computing in Science and Engineering 9 (2007) 21–29.
[48] http://galaxyproject.org.
[49] https://kepler-project.org.
[50] http://www.knime.org.
[51] http://www.vistrails.org.
[52] K. Wolstencroft, R. Haines, D. Fellows, A. Williams, D. Withers, S. Owen,
S. Soiland-Reyes, I. Dunlop, A. Nenadic, P. Fisher, J. Bhagat, K. Belhajjame,
F. Bacall, A. Hardisty, A. Nieva de la Hidalga, M. P. Balcazar Vargas, S. Suﬁ,
C. Goble, Nucleic Acids Research 41 (2013) W557–W561.
[53] A. P. Bart´ok, M. C. Payne, R. Kondor, G. Cs´anyi, Phys. Rev. Lett. 104 (2010)
136403–.
[54] C. W. Glass, A. R. Oganov, N. Hansen, Comp. Phys. Comm. 175 (2006) 713–720.
29

[55] C. J. Pickard, R. J. Needs, J. Phys. Cond. Matt. 23 (2011) 053201–.
[56] http://sphinx-doc.org.
[57] http://www.ietf.org/rfc/rfc4122.txt.
[58] http://mpod.cimav.edu.mx/index/.
[59] P. Giannozzi, S. Baroni, N. Bonini, M. Calandra, R. Car, C. Cavazzoni,
D. Ceresoli, G. L. Chiarotti, M. Cococcioni, I. Dabo, A. D. Corso, S. de Giron-
coli, S. Fabris, G. Fratesi, R. Gebauer, U. Gerstmann, C. Gougoussis, A. Kokalj,
M. Lazzeri, L. Martin-Samos, N. Marzari, F. Mauri, R. Mazzarello, S. Paolini,
A. Pasquarello, L. Paulatto, C. Sbraccia, S. Scandolo, G. Sclauzero, A. P. Seit-
sonen, A. Smogunov, P. Umari, R. M. Wentzcovitch, J. Phys. Cond. Matt. 21
(2009) 395502–.
[60] S. Graˇzulis, A. Merkys, A. Vaitkus, M. Okuliˇc-Kazarinas, J. Appl. Cryst. 48
(2015) 85–91.
[61] J. J. Mortensen, L. B. Hansen, K. W. Jacobsen, Phys. Rev. B 71 (2005) 035109.
[62] E. Kucukbenli, M. Monni, B. Adetunji, X. Ge, G. Adebayo, N. Marzari,
S. de Gironcoli, A. Dal Corso, arXiv:1404.3015v1 (2014).
[63] http://qe-forge.org/gf/project/pslibrary/.
[64] K. F. Garrity, J. W. Bennett, K. M. Rabe, D. Vanderbilt, Computational Mate-
rials Science 81 (2014) 446–452.
[65] N. Marzari, D. Vanderbilt, A. De Vita, M. C. Payne, Phys. Rev. Lett. 82 (1999)
3296–3299.
[66] G. Borghi, A. Ferretti, N. L. Nguyen, I. Dabo, N. Marzari, Phys. Rev. B 90 (2014)
075135.
[67] http://cassandra.apache.org/.
[68] http://couchdb.apache.org/.
[69] http://www.mongodb.org/.
30
