The evolution of Materials Acceleration Platforms -
towards the laboratory of the future with AMANDA
Jerrit Wagner1,2,*, Christian G. Berger1,2, Xiaoyan Du1,2, Tobias Stubhan3, Jens A. Hauch1,2,*,
Christoph J. Brabec1,2
1 Forschungszentrum Jülich GmbH, Helmholtz-Institute Erlangen-Nürnberg for Renewable Energy (IEK-11),
Immerwahrstraße 2, 91058 Erlangen, Germany
2 Institute of Materials for Electronics and Energy Technology (i-MEET), Department of Materials Science and
Engineering, Friedrich-Alexander University Erlangen-Nürnberg, Martensstrasse 7, 91058 Erlangen, Germany
3 SCIPRIOS GmbH, Fürther Str. 244a, 90429 Nürnberg, Germany
*Authors to whom correspondence should be addressed: j.wagner@fz-juelich.de and j.hauch@fz-juelich.de
Abstract
The development of complex functional materials poses a multi-objective optimization
problem in a large multidimensional parameter space. Solving it requires reproducible, user
independent
laboratory
work
and
intelligent
preselection
of experiments. However,
experimental materials science is a field where manual routines are still predominant,
although other domains like pharmacy or chemistry have long used robotics and automation.
As the number of publications on Materials Acceleration Platforms (MAPs) increases
steadily, we review selected systems and fit them into the stages of a general material
development process to examine the evolution of MAPs. Subsequently we present our
approach
to
laboratory
automation
in
materials
science.
We
introduce
AMANDA
(Autonomous Materials and Device Application Platform) , a generic platform for distributed
1
materials research comprising a self-developed software backbone and several MAPs. One of
them, LineOne (L1), is specifically designed to produce and characterize solution processed
thin-film devices like organic solar cells (OSC). It is designed to perform precise closed-loop
screenings of up to 272 device variations per day yet allows further upscaling. Each
individual solar cell is fully characterized and all process steps are comprehensively
documented. We want to demonstrate the capabilities of AMANDA L1 with OSCs based on
PM6:Y6 with 13.7% efficiency when processed in air. Further we discuss challenges and
opportunities of highly automated research platforms and elaborate on the future integration
of additional techniques, methods and algorithms in order to advance to fully autonomous
self-optimizing systems - a paradigm shift in functional materials development leading to the
laboratory of the future.
1 www.amanda-platform.com
1

Introduction
Industrial production is based on a continual repetition of the same production process. Since
the 18th century, increasingly automated machines have been developed to speed up
production and improve quality. Today, the ever-growing automation of industrial processes
has led to completely automated production plants. Computational methods and data
collection further integrate the knowledge about the manufacturing processes into production
planning systems in order to make informed decisions [1]. As such, these “smart” industrial
processes are referred to as “Industry 4.0” [2].
The automation of simple scientific tasks started much later in the late 19th century with
simple tasks like washing filtrates or conducting solvent extraction [3]. In the laboratory
environment it was not until the 1980s with the pioneering work of Sasaki that more complex
setups were implemented, where several devices were coupled together and samples were
automatically handled [4, 5]. Until today, these advances are mainly found in the field of
clinical and pharmacological research [3, 6].
The potential for automation as a disruptive technology to greatly accelerate materials science
has been recognized for years [7]. Several programs like the Materials Genome Initiative [8]
(MGI) and the Clean Energy Materials Innovation Challenge [9] target faster material
development and commercialization by introducing automation into the field of materials
science. Latter defined the combination of highly automated robotic setups with inline
characterization and artificial intelligence (AI) as a Materials Acceleration Platform (MAP).
First approaches of automation have been shown already a decade ago, mainly utilizing
high-throughput techniques [10–12]. AI guided selection of experimental parameters,
so-called closed-loop optimization, emerged only recently [13–15].
Coupling modular robotic techniques with comprehensive data collection and artificial
intelligence enables new experimental approaches like the inverse design of materials
synthesis [16]. Automation can also be the gateway to higher reproducibility, an attribute
often missing in scientific research. According to a survey by Baker among 1500 physics and
chemistry scientists, more than 40% have failed to reproduce their own experiments. This
rate is even as high as 60% when trying to reproduce the experiments from other laboratories
[17]. The use of automated devices such as robots or pipetting units reduces the error into
defined margins, because of enhanced repeatability and their constant accuracy. The specified
operational ranges can be taken into consideration during process design but also evaluation.
Automated research platforms can therefore contribute to increase the reproducibility of, and
thus the confidence in published data.
While classical automation in mass production is based on the strict repetition of the same
process, it is characteristic for laboratory research in materials science to vary parameters and
the process itself in order to understand and optimize a material system. For the automation
of a laboratory it is therefore critical to keep the workflows as flexible as possible. However,
automated, robot-supported processes always lead to restrictions. While a typical robot for
2

handling samples has between 3 and 10 joints, the human body has several hundred joints
[18, 19]. This means that the automated system will have significantly fewer degrees of
freedom than a researcher operating with the same processing and characterization
equipment. In addition humans are not confined to a particular area - they can walk to
different parts of the laboratory, while the typical robot is fixed in location. First approaches
are being shown, like the mobile robot chemist, to compensate for this weakness [13].
Nevertheless a researcher can also make ad-hoc decisions to change a workflow or introduce
a new procedure at any time, while in an automated system the development and testing of
new features often delays utilization.
Despite these challenges flexible automated setups with customizable processes have the
potential to encourage the transition from traditional lab work into the laboratory of the
future. Highly customizable experimental design preserves a researcher’s ability of
individually adapting the experiments and is key for scientific discoveries. Our vision for a
lab of the future expands laboratory work with automation for enhanced experimental
precision, implements digital technologies for data collection and storage, performs
simulations and uses artificial intelligence to guide the researcher.
In this publication we examine the evolution of Materials Acceleration Platforms and
introduce a system that goes significantly beyond the state-of-the-art. Our Autonomous
Materials and Device Application Platform: AMANDA is designed as a framework for the
2
laboratory of the future, including a generic software backbone with the capability of
controlling multiple Materials Accelerations Platforms. The software allows for a high degree
of automation to accelerate research while keeping the lab processes flexible. Data is
collected at all stages of the process; during preparation, execution and characterization for a
comprehensive and complete documentation. All data sets are interlinked and retrievable to
allow systematic analyses across experiments. Self-driven feedback loops additionally enable
autonomous
experimentation
against
optimization
targets.
Additionally,
the
system
implements
an
experiment-as-a-service
(EaaS)
approach.
Researchers
define
their
experiments through a web-interface. The processing is then conducted automatically on
AMANDA’s Materials Acceleration Platforms and the results can again be retrieved online.
AMANDA is used in this publication to drive an automated experimental line which is
designed to accelerate the materials and process development for solution processed organic
solar cells - LineOne (L1). Organic photovoltaics (OPV) is a promising field of materials
science and a viable path towards cleaner energy production [20]. Research is driven by new
materials and the production routes are defined by the complex bulk heterojunction
morphology, leading to a large variety of process parameters influencing the solar cell
2 www.amanda-platform.com
3

performance [21–27]. Lately the PM6 :Y6 material system attracted a lot of attention in the
3
4
OPV research community for boosting the efficiency of organic solar cells up to 18% [25,
28–31]. Adding further materials, like additional electron donors or acceptors into the
PM6:Y6 active layer mixture can improve both efficiency [32, 33] and long-term stability
[34] of produced solar cell devices. However, the complexity in the fabrication process as
well as the grown number of process parameters in multi-component systems makes it
increasingly difficult to investigate such systems manually [32, 35]. For a systematic
screening of the vast amount of promising OPV materials and combinations, utilizing
automation is a viable solution and becomes more and more necessary to reduce the time of
material qualification, as the availability of new materials is increasing steadily [36].
We demonstrate the capabilities of L1 at the hand of the state-of-the-art OPV material system
PM6:Y6 [23, 25]. In this work L1 processed complete PM6:Y6 based bulk heterojunction
solar cells in air. A power conversion efficiency of 13.7% was reached, which compares to
other reports on the processing of that material system in ambient atmosphere [37].
Furthermore, a reproducibility study was performed over the course of three months on that
material system. In 19 different experiments with the same materials and process parameters
we show that L1 performs steadily at a very low deviation with an interquartile range of
0.74% in power conversion efficiency (PCE). We take advantage of this reproducibility to
investigate the influence of solid content and solution amount for the spin coating process on
the solar cell performance. Additionally we discuss the difficulties but also the advantages of
operating fully integrated MAPs. Finally, we elaborate the future development roadmap for
the AMANDA Platform as well as the opportunities we see by the implementation of such
systems.
The evolution of Materials Acceleration Platforms
The development of humankind is strongly linked to the evolution of materials. As
knowledge and technical skills improved, people gained access to more complex material
compositions and manufacturing processes. Figure 1a qualitatively relates the complexity of
material composition and processes for fabricating functional materials throughout the
historical eras. Material compositions used in the distant past, such as Bronze, consisted of
only two elements. In strong contrast to this binary compound, the chemical parameter space
42,2′-((2Z,2′Z)-((12,13-bis(2-ethylhexyl)-3,9-diundecyl-12,13-dihydro-
[1,2,5]thiadiazolo[3,4-e]thieno[2,"3′’:4’,5′]thieno[2′,3′:4,5]pyrrolo[3,2-g]thieno[2′,3′:4,5]thieno[3,2-b]indole-2,1
0-diyl)bis(methanylylidene))bis(5,6-difluoro-3-oxo-2,3-dihydro-1H-indene-2,1-diylidene))dimalononitrile)
-
chemical structure is given in figure 5a
3(poly[(2,6-(4,8-bis(5-(2-ethylhexyl)-4-fluorothiophen2-yl)benzo[1,2-b:4,5-b0]dithiophene))-
co-(1,3-di(5-thiophene-2-yl)-5,7- bis(2-ethylhexyl)-benzo[1,2-c:4,5-c0 ]dithiophene-4,8-dione))] - chemical
structure is given in figure 5a
4

available in the organic chemistry of small molecules alone is estimated at around 1063
possible molecules [38]. A similar increase of complexity is seen in the processing of
materials. To make bronze, tin and copper ore were molten at around 1000°C for a few hours
about 5000 years ago [39]. Nowadays, the process to get electronic grade, high purity silicon
is much more complex. The commonly used Czochralski process for the production of silicon
single crystals, needs temperatures of around 1400°C, high purity raw material containing
e.g. less than 0.2 parts per billion of boron and phosphorus, intensive Argon purging of the
reactor and slow, yet very consistent pulling speeds of a single crystal seed of few millimeter
per minute [40]. The dimensionality of the parameter space increases dramatically with
growing complexity of the compounds and processes. A vast multi-dimensional space
requires a structured examination, however finding its optimum becomes an increasingly
daunting task. In order to master this challenge, materials science today relies on the intuition
and experience of scientists to reduce the necessary number of samples. In order to transfer
this complex optimization problem to automated systems, it is crucial to understand the
process of material development and divide it into its individual parts. The commonly
practiced materials discovery procedure to develop and optimize new functional materials
can be reduced to the following steps:
1. Formulating a hypothesis or research question
2. Selection of “precursor” materials
3. Performing a process with the selected precursors to generate a product
4. Characterizing the properties of the product by measurement(s)
5. Evaluating the overall result based on the characterization
Conventional laboratory research in materials science experimentation is predominantly
manual. The individual experimental parameters are chosen by the researcher (oftentimes
students) and varied in order to reach some sort of optimum. The selection of parameters
relies on a mixture of knowledge, experimentation results and intuition in order to improve
performance step by step (compare figure 1c: manual research). Precision relies on the
thoroughness, diligence, dexterity and aptitude of the scientist performing the work, all
factors that may change on a daily basis. This leads to a strong user-dependency of
experimental results and can therefore impair the reproducibility of scientific results.
Furthermore,
only
successful
experiments
and
results
are
usually
published while
unsuccessful experiments are often not even documented. Much of the knowledge that might
still be important for a systematic understanding is often lost as it has neither been stored nor
shared among peers.
5

Fig. 1: a) Qualitative representation of processing and composition complexity of various
functional materials in a historical perspective. b) Time development of the number of
publications found with the search terms “materials” AND “development” AND (“artificial
intelligence” OR “machine learning”), and “materials” AND “development” AND
“automation” in publication title, abstract and keywords. The numbers of publications per
year are gathered from Scopus and are normalized to the year 2000. c) Schematic view of
materials discovery process in the classical approach, automated and in AI enhanced
closed-loop mode. d) Comparison of different MAPs of the last decade, with MAPs focusing
on photovoltaic materials in bold. The y-axis shows the capability of the systems categorized
6

in different stages of the functional material discovery process. The left y-axis is generalized,
while the right y-axis focuses on solution processed photovoltaic materials. A timeline on the
bottom shows the publication date, first author and, if available, name of the platforms.
The purpose of automation in R&D (different to automation in production) is not so much
about being faster, but it is rather about guaranteeing highest data quality, best possible
reproducibility, control over all parameters and the complete collection of all data in a
database. Automated laboratory systems can relieve scientists from repetitive laboratory work
and give them more time to design and evaluate their experiments carefully. For processes
which involve manual routines, like e.g. pipetting, they offer a high reproducibility.
Automated systems also make it easy to systematically collect large amounts of additional
data, like timings, temperature, humidity or other conditions which a researcher often would
not collect in her lab book for later evaluation (figure 1c: automated research). Yet, even with
the benefits of automation, the systematic and complete screening of all parameter
dimensions is not feasible in high dimensional spaces due to the large number of experiments
required. Employing closed-loop inline AI optimization to guide the search for an optimum
reduces the amount of experiments. The enabler to properly use AI is a systematic data
collection in a machine readable format. Utilizing computational predictions allows MAPs to
autonomously select which points to probe while scientists can focus on the experimental
hypothesis and the inference from the collected data (figure 1c: closed-loop research). This
approach makes much better use of the intellectual resources of the scientists. At the same
time the reproducibility of automated processing provides the required data quality for a
precise reconstruction of the complex hypersurfaces - minimizing the required samples to
find an optimum. The drastic reduction in the number of experiments, as well as the
scalability of the approach, are the driving force for an accelerated discovery of innovative
functional materials.
The advantages of automated setups have led to the increased use of such systems in recent
years. The life sciences were among the first fields to adopt equipment with features of
MAPs. The field of pharmacy and drug research was revolutionized through the introduction
of automation by Mitsuhide Sasaki from 1981-1992 at the Kochi Medical School [4, 5]. The
field of synthetic chemistry was also among the “early adopters” of automation, with first
reports on automated synthesis dating all the way back to 1966 [41]. An early overview for
automated setups in the field of chemistry was already compiled by Lindsey in 1992 [42].
Highly automated setups comparable to MAPs were first introduced in the fields of systems
biology with landmark systems like ADAM and EVE [43, 44], which already combined high
degrees of automation, data extraction and hypothesis driven closed loop repetition for
dedicated tasks like yeast or drug screening.
Figure 1d captures the evolution of automated setups in materials science over the last
decade, categorizing their degree of automation and their capabilities at different stages of the
functional materials development process. The figure focuses somewhat on platforms for
photovoltaic materials, yet we included selected other notable robotic systems for reference
and comparison. Their capabilities from chemical synthesis up to stability testing are shown
7

on the y-axis. The left labels categorize the generalized materials development process into
stages from synthesis to qualification via stress tests, which are implemented by the MAPs.
Specific designations for OPV research are shown on the right side, covering the range from
polymer synthesis to stability testing.
The first step in the development of new functional materials is the chemical synthesis (e.g.
an organic semiconducting polymer). In order to process these synthesized materials, the
substances must be brought into a precursor state (e.g. a formulated ink made from an
organic polymer). If solution-based processes are used, this typically involves steps like
mixing, filtering, dispersing or dissolving. The precursors are then processed into some
component (e.g. a layer on a substrate in OPV). Depending on the field of application this
component can have many manifestations. To get the desired functionality additional steps or
materials usually are applied, e.g. deposition of an electrode grid, interlayers or protective
coatings. If the functionality needed for a specific application like the power conversion for a
solar cell is achieved, the temporal variation of that property can be tracked. This is usually
done by a stress test, such as a light or heat induced stability quantification in photovoltaics.
By applying these categories of the materials development process we examine the
development of MAPs. Our particular focus lies on advances in the automation for chemical
synthesis and solution processed photovoltaics over the last decade.
MAPs in the field of chemical synthesis
The field of chemistry has been quite strong in the development of automated setups [42],
and a considerable amount of MAPs specialize on chemical synthesis. WANDA from Chan et
al. [11], first introduced in 2008, is among the earliest systems used for the development of
functional materials. WANDA is a pipetting robot with a specially developed low thermal
mass reactor for fully automated solution-based synthesis of colloidal nanocrystals. WANDA
was utilized to perform high-throughput mapping of materials ratios and other process
conditions with the purpose to optimize photoluminescence yield and peak width,
upconversion luminescence and polydispersity of different nanocrystals. WANDA combined
liquid handling with the ability to transport and handle vials, was built by adapting
reasonably standard systems from pharmaceutical research, and required significant human
interaction to run.
Another important synthesis system is ARES from Nikolaev et al. [10, 45, 46] which
combined chemical vapor deposition for carbon nanotube synthesis with an in-situ raman
spectroscopy for direct distinction between single-walled and multi-walled carbon nanotubes.
The 4-dimensional parameter space of the nanotube growth is spanned by reaction
temperature, ethene and hydrogen partial pressure and water content. While the synthesis and
analysis of the nanotubes are automated, the prediction of further parameter combinations by
a linear regression model was first conducted manually off-line. In 2016 the authors reported
an update to their system which has since been able to perform in-line closed-loop prediction.
8

In the past five years the systems have become more and more sophisticated. For the
chemical synthesis of small molecules Li et al. demonstrated a highly automated platform in
2015 [47]. They utilize a system for building-block based synthesis with standardized
chemical reactions to synthesize 14 different classes of small molecules. They also
discovered a commonly applicable catch-and-release purification based on a common key
intermediate. The synthesis is broken down to deprotection, coupling and purification and
works with a lot of commercially available building blocks. However, the synthesis path must
be predefined by the user, an autonomous operation of the system is not described.
Steiner et al. in 2019 describe their Chemputer [47, 48], a hardware that consists of an
extensible backbone of syringe pumps and 6-way-valves to move reactants across the system.
The synthesis module is abstracted to four general steps, namely reaction, work-up, isolation
and purification. The abstraction is formalized to a chemical programming language, out of
which the so-called Chempiler can generate low-level instructions for the hardware modules.
For synthesis of a new molecule a retrosynthetic module generates a synthesis route, which is
then carried out by the synthesis module. The Chemputer was validated on the chemical
synthesis of three pharmaceutical compounds with yields and purities comparable or better
than synthesis by hand.
A comparably unconventional approach for MAPs is described by Burger et al. [13]. Their
mobile robotic chemist is composed of a robot arm mounted on top of an automated guided
vehicle. It operates in a customary laboratory by driving through it from one workstation to
another and using the arm to operate each station like a human would. The platform is able to
operate many hours under closed-loop conditions, where new experiments are suggested by a
Bayesian optimization algorithm. An optimization of photocatalysts mixtures for water
splitting in a 10 dimensional parameter space is shown. The system mixes the precursor
materials to form a functional photocatalyst-component. These catalysts were subsequently
illuminated and the hydrogen evolution was measured. Five hypotheses were formulated and
simultaneously tested. After 688 experiments and nearly 8 days of processing, a composition
was found which showed a 6-fold higher hydrogen evolution compared to the starting
conditions.
MAPs in the field of solution processed photovoltaics
Recently, an increasing number of reports on MAPs for photovoltaic research is seen. The
platforms described so far mainly synthesize and characterize chemical compounds. In
contrast to this, the following PV systems are not capable of performing complex chemical
reactions. These platforms rather start by mixing different compounds and can go as far as
stability testing functional solar cells.
A closed-loop synthesis platform for perovskite crystals called ESCALATE is described by
Pendleton et al. [14] also in 2019. The focus of the work is on the orchestration software,
which
is
an
open
source
ontological
framework
for
machine-readable
experiment
specification. ESCALATE comes with an abstraction layer for human interaction to simplify
the initial data gathering process and facilitate the application of machine learning
9

algorithms. It also offers the advantage that it can automatically generate a report from the
available data. They demonstrate collecting a large dataset of metal-halide perovskite single
crystal reactions on a commercial pipetting robot platform by preparing precursor inks and
letting them crystallize.
Chen et al. [49] describe an automated high throughput synthesis and screening platform for
mixed perovskite materials. They combined different binary compositions of iodide and
bromide cations to optimize stable high-bandgap perovskite materials. Precursor inks were
mixed by a pipetting robot and subsequently an antisolvent was added to start a precipitation
process for forming polycrystalline perovskite particles. The most promising candidates were
then manually processed into perovskite thin films and further to solar cell devices.
A similar process is shown by Xie et al. [49, 50] for the synthesis of nanoparticle dispersions
for organic solar cell inks. An automated pipetting robot was used to dispense a
donor:acceptor precursor solution into different alcohols in which the organic molecules
formed nano precipitates. The inks were used to fabricate organic thin-film solar cell devices
by hand, where they found ethanol as the most promising eco-friendly solvent for organic
solar cell fabrication for P3HT:ICBA nanoparticle dispersions.
The above two examples show how ink preparation and optimization for solution based solar
cells can be automated. Yet, the formation of thin films out of the inks is still conducted
manually. The following MAPs focus on automated thin film formation out of liquid inks and
go
even
beyond by producing complete solar cell devices and characterize them
subsequently.
A closed-loop MAP for thin film formation and characterization is Ada by MacLeod et al.
[15, 49, 50] Ada is a robotic platform for autonomous optimization of optical and electrical
film properties. The modular platform uses a Bayesian optimization algorithm to suggest
modifications
of
processing
conditions
and
material
compositions.
The
setup was
demonstrated by the optimization of the hole conductivity of organic hole transporting layers.
The inks are prepared by a pipetting channel out of stock solutions and spin coated to form
thin films on glass substrates. The samples are then thermally annealed, photographed,
optically characterized by UV-VIS spectroscopy and electrically measured by a four point
probe. Subsequently, the hole mobility is calculated out of the measurement data and fed to
an implementation of the Bayesian optimization algorithm Phoenics. The whole setup is
controlled by the software ChemOS [51] which also interfaces to the AI for the closed-loop
suggestion of the next sampling set.
Another application of the Bayesian optimization algorithm Phoenics is demonstrated by
Langner et al. [52] They investigated two 4-dimensional parameters spaces, each created by
the mixing of two organic electron donor and two electron acceptor materials. The aim of that
work was to find light-stable material combinations for the photoactive layer of organic solar
cells. The mixing ratios were suggested by the Bayesian optimization algorithm Phoenics.
The suggested inks were mixed automatically on a pipetting robot and the resulting solutions
were drop cast onto glass samples by the robot. After drying, thin films of the material
10

compositions were formed. UV-VIS absorption spectra were obtained of each film. Samples
were manually transferred under a metal halide lamp and illuminated for 18 hours at a light
intensity of 100 mW/cm². Subsequent to this stability test a second absorption measurement
was obtained. The integral change of the two measurements was calculated and fed back to
Phoenics
as
a
value
for
photo-induced
degradation.
Compared
to
a
conducted
high-throughput screening of the 4 dimensional parameter spaces, the time for finding a
material combination, optimized for photo-stability was reduced by a factor of around 32.
The first, and up to now only, automated laboratory system for the manufacture and
characterization of solution processed solar cells was already described by Walter et al. in
2009 [12]. HTF-7 as they call their fabrication machine, is based on a multi-channel pipetting
robot which is not only able to handle solutions and thus prepare inks for further processing,
but also to move samples. They demonstrated a fully automated spin coating process of a
hole transport layer, followed by subsequent thermal treatment and a second spin coating step
in which the active photovoltaic thin film is spin coated. Thereafter the samples are
transferred manually to an evaporation chamber for electrode deposition. The prepared
functional solar cell samples are subsequently measured on a second automated setup,
designated for optical and electrical characterization called HTC-7. This setup is able to
automatically measure the current voltage characteristics (IV) and the external quantum
efficiency (EQE) of the solar cell devices. A case study on OPV devices investigates the
influence of the film thicknesses of the hole transport layer and the active layer on the power
conversion efficiency. However, the platform is not limited to photovoltaic applications. In
principle, all opto electronic thin film devices processed from organic solvents can be
processed and characterized on these setups, which was demonstrated by showing studies on
organic field effect transistors (OFET) and organic light emitting diodes (OLED).
What comes next?
The degree of automation and autonomy of the platforms described in the previous sections
ranges from semi-automatic and partially hand-operated to setups that operate in automated
closed-loop processes.
In general, the functionality of automated systems is limited to a certain area of application.
All presented platforms cover a certain stage of the whole materials development process.
How many stages of that process a MAP covers determines how much of the research is
automatically conducted and consequently influences the research acceleration factor. The
laboratory of the future goes beyond just conducting individual experiments and predicting
new experimental parameters based on gathered measurement results. It is a combination of
several stages served by automation and driven by algorithms that gather scientific
experience across these stages from every single datapoint of all setups. This knowledge can
be
utilized
to
find
to-date
unknown
chemical/physical
interdependencies
like
structure-property relationships or answer other fundamental scientific questions.
On the way to this vision, the next generation of MAPs must cover a multitude of research
stages, be able to capture complete process data sets, execute flexible processes, easily
11

integrate new features through a modular design and communicate with other entities like
remote AI, external databases or even other MAPs.
With AMANDA we are trying to follow this path. The developed system is an universal and
extensible research tool for automatic and autonomous investigation of material science
problems. It consists of a software framework, that provides a generic research automation
system to operate MAPs and complete research laboratories. A fully operational and
automated
Materials
Acceleration
Platform
for
the
purpose
of
manufacturing
and
characterizing lab-scale organic photovoltaic devices is included within the AMANDA
platform. This system with the name LineOne (L1) consists of ca. 150 automated devices of
37 types orchestrated by the AMANDA software. L1 conducts experiments on solution based
thin film devices without human intervention during the process. It starts from stock solutions
and cleaned substrates, is able to prepare inks and is capable of forming a stack of thin films
by spin coating and thermal evaporation. Thermal treatment, optical and electronic
measurements of thin films and functional solar cells are available as well as an accelerated
aging setup to test layers and OPV devices on their stability with light intensities of up to 15
sun equivalents. The system offers full flexibility in the arrangement of the experiments and
has a modular machine learning interface to utilize closed-loop operation with different
algorithms.
System Description – The AMANDA Platform
The AMANDA Platform is a generic research tool for distributed materials research consisting
of a self developed software backbone which is capable of controlling multiple MAPs. It is
able to coordinate the automated laboratory equipment of the affiliated MAPs, store all
process information and measurement results in a central database and employ artificial
intelligence to accelerate materials optimization. One of the controlled MAPs is L1. It is
composed of about 150 devices of 37 different types and is designed to fabricate and
characterize solution processed thin film devices like organic solar cells.
AMANDA Software Framework
On the software side, AMANDA was designed with flexibility as a major priority and by
minimizing systematic limitations as much as possible. As a consequence, the developed
framework supports a large variety of equipment, with a toolset for quick integration of new
devices into the system. Through this flexible approach the AMANDA control software is able
to model a very large number of processes. Instead of hard programmed sequences, the
ability to operate on so-called sequence plans is provided. These are highly customizable
process recipes for the research facility which can be either arbitrarily arranged or
automatically generated. They enable working with and tracking of variables as well as the
usage of standard control flow operations (e.g. loops, cases, jumps) in the process. This
12

allows the conduction of any desired researcher-defined experiment sequence within the
capabilities of the given hardware.
The sequence plans are handled in the control module of the system. This module provides
means of parallelization through a token based system [53] in order to make the best possible
use of the equipment available and increase the average machine utilization time. Apart from
parallelization AMANDA also has the capability of handling multiple hardware research
facilities with the same software and database. This is important, especially when it comes to
scalability. The hardware structure can be duplicated easily if there is an increased demand
for research capacity. Likewise it might be necessary to break the workflow, e.g. to perform a
particular characterization that is not possible in the line but on another setup. This feature of
distributed control goes beyond just using a common control program for the facilities or a
common user interface.
To make the distributed control possible, AMANDA intrinsically assigns every item that is
processed a unique sample ID. For example, with the facility L1 we are able to conduct
complete experiments, starting at stock solutions, continuing with substrate handling and
layer formation, evaporation of back electrodes and characterization of the working cells. It is
possible to remove samples from this sequence, perform process steps or analytics on these
samples, and return them into the sequence at a later point in time. Through the unique IDs,
samples can be tracked and handled throughout the complete laboratory “landscape”.
In order to implement that level of data penetration, a considerable effort was put into
properly defining the database. While still striving to be as generic as possible with respect to
potential recorded data, the database follows the FAIR guiding principles for scientific data
management
and
stewardship
[54].
This
especially
relates
to the referencing, the
cross-linking and traceability of data entries. In addition, the developed software by design
tracks the actions with all the materials, substrates and supplies from registration upon
delivery, over processing until final discarding. Having a full history on every item allows
further analyses to be conducted that have yet been outside of the scope of imagination.
In-process measurements give further unprecedented insights of the sample fabrication
process and allow the correlation of individual process characteristics with the performance
of the finished sample.
This especially relates to the referencing, the cross-linking and traceability of data entries. In
addition, the developed software by design tracks the actions with all the materials, substrates
and supplies from registration upon delivery, over processing until final discarding. Having a
full history on every item allows further analyses to be conducted that have yet been outside
of the scope of imagination. In-process measurements give further unprecedented insights of
the sample fabrication process and allow the correlation of individual process characteristics
with the performance of the finished sample.
13

Fig. 2: a) Overview of the Autonomous Materials and Device Application Platform AMANDA
components. The left two columns represent components of the software framework, while the
hardware implementations are shown on the right. Each hardware facility fulfills a specific
function, e.g. L1 for the manufacturing and evaluation of opto-electronic samples. The
grayed out systems are not discussed further in this publication b) Screenshot of the
graphical user interface of AMANDA. Example of the ‘Stack configurator’ - a tool for
designing an experiment by visually configuring a stack of liquid processed thin films and the
14

process parameters. c) Screenshot of the ‘Sequence Plan’ - A drag and drop graphical user
interface for freely designing arbitrary process sequences and executing them.
Going beyond just the automated conduction of experiments, AMANDA follows an
Experiment-as-a-Service approach. Experiments are planned by researchers, sent as “print
job” into the queue and eventually processed by the research facilities. With the introduction
of abstraction layers, especially through visual configurators, researchers can focus on the
experimental design rather than understanding the hardware setup. For the L1 implementation
the sequence of layers in an OPV-cell is considered as a stack. To define the process for each
layer a stack configurator with adjustable parameters, including pre- and post-treatment
options, allows the graphical configuration of a stack (see figure 2b) through a drag and drop
approach. This stack is then translated into a sequence plan (see figure 2c) of individual
process steps, broken down into machine commands, for direct execution on AMANDA.
Automatically generated reports and interactive graphs give a quick insight into the
experimental results as soon as a measurement of a sample has been conducted.
Instead of providing desktop software, an all-web-based approach was followed and the
complete graphical user interface (GUI) is provided on the Internet, usable with common web
browsers like Edge, Firefox or Chrome. As a consequence, researchers can plan, view and
adjust their experiments from anywhere with Internet access, independent of location or
terminal device.
The flexibility is also reflected by the data sources and targets for the system. The capability
of interfacing with external entities, especially databases or other algorithms is designed into
AMANDA’s core. External data sources of any kind (e.g. files, APIs, etc.) can be read in and
are integrated with proper data reference and data tagging. Furthermore, a web-based API for
external interfacing with e.g. experiment planners or ML algorithms is provided. The API is
following a RESTful approach and is written in OpenApi 3.0 specification for quick client
integration into existing systems. It exposes, according to a user permission system, access to
many features like project, experiment and job management, measurement results or process
logs.
The Materials Acceleration Platform LineOne (L1)
The AMANDA orchestrated research facility L1 consists of 3 compartments (glove boxes for
future processing in inert atmosphere), each separated by controllable pneumatic doors or air
locks. A picture and a schematic view of L1 is shown in figure 3. Each glove box can be
loaded from the outside into preparation areas to provide materials and disposables to the
system. Three transporting robots carry substrates, solutions and disposables between
different stations within the line. A flange-mounted evaporation unit is attached to glove box
3 and is automatically loaded by a special transport robot.
15

Fig. 3: a) Overview of the AMANDA laboratory with L1 on the left side and the control desk
on the right. b) Schematic view of L1 and its components. Box 1: Solution preparation;
16

including a pipetting robot, hot plates (HP), a scale and a sealing unit. Box 2: Spin coating
and optical characterization; including a transport robot, a pipetting robot with hot plates, a
spin coater, a UV-VIS spectrometer and an inspection camera. Box 3: Device completion and
electrical characterization; including transport robots, a storage compartment, accelerated
aging module, current-voltage (IV) measurement station and an evaporation unit. c) Top view
of the second glove box of L1. The pipetting tips (1), substrate carriers (2), vial holders (3),
spin coater (4) and trash bins (5) are located on the pipetting robots working area. The
gripper (6) and pipetting channels (7) of the pipetting robot are also shown. Additionally
there is a transport robot (8), hot plates for thermal annealing (9), waiting positions for
substrate carriers (10), the UV-VIS-spectrometer and the inspection camera (12).
Since most of the layers are applied with solution based techniques, the core of L1 is the
combined pipetting and spin coating station with heat shakers and hot plates as shown in
figure 3b/c. Substrates are handled in batches of 6 or 8 substrates, each transported in
SBS [55] sized substrate carrier frames. The used substrates are 25x25mm in size and usually
contain 6 solar cells, each with an active area of 10.4 mm². Stock solutions for ink
preparation are provided in v-bottom glass vials and are also transported in carriers of 24 or
32 each.
The liquid handling robot consists of 4 pipetting channels and a robotic gripper arm. The
latter can transport individual samples from the substrate carrier to the spin coater and back.
The pipetting channels are used to prepare coating inks from stock solutions and distribute
the ink on the substrates for layer formation. We implemented two modes for spin coating
(schematic in figure S1):
1. A quasi-static mode, referred to as the “on-the-fly” spin coating technique. Here, the
substrate is rotated slowly (~60 rpm) while the pipette with the coating ink moves
linearly in close proximity over the substrate while distributing the ink in a slow and
uniform manner. When the substrate is completely covered with the solution, the spin
coater accelerates to a defined target velocity.
2. A dynamic mode, where the substrate is already rotating at its target velocity and the
ink is then dispensed at high speed into the center of the rotating substrate.
After ink deposition the centrifugal forces of the rotation drag the excess solution over the
substrate towards their edges, creating a wet film. The film quality is influenced by many
parameters like spin coating velocity, applied volume, solution properties, surface energies
etc. Subsequently, the residual solvent evaporates, leaving behind a dry layer.
Another available layer application process is drop casting. A small amount of solution is
dispensed directly onto a sample, leaving it there to dry under adjustable circumstances e.g.
elevated temperatures of the sample.
There are options for thermal sample treatment in L1. Several automated hot plates enable
thermal annealing of samples under various conditions like reduced atmospheric pressure and
17

temperatures of up to 380°C. Solutions can also be treated, and are usually positioned on heat
shakers to both mix and temperate them.
L1 furthermore offers possibilities for layer characterization. A camera setup can record high
resolution photographs of the samples. Those records can be used by AMANDA's image
analysis capability to calculate layer properties like surface coverage, homogeneity and defect
density. Moreover, there is a UV-Vis spectrometer with an integrated x-y-stage for optical
absorbance and photoluminescence measurements at distinct spots on the sample. As a
standard procedure optical data is recorded in the areas where the solar cells will be located
on the finished sample.
Layer formation on this setup is not limited to solution based methods, but can also be
conducted by thermal evaporation. A two-source evaporator is integrated into the setup and
accessible for the transport robots, allowing an automatically controlled deposition of up to
two different materials. To define active areas for the opto-electronic cells, various shadow
masks can be attached onto the samples prior to loading, allowing different geometries and
sizes of the evaporated top electrode.
The layer stack can also be characterized by opto-electrical means using an LED-based class
AAA solar simulator (Wavelabs Sinus 70) and several source measurement units.
Current-voltage-characteristics of each cell can be recorded and are subsequently evaluated
for the characteristic performance values like power conversion efficiency, short circuit
current, etc. The light intensity of the solar simulator can be adjusted in order to gain an
insight into the light intensity dependence of the JV-curves of the produced samples.
In order to evaluate the long-term durability of the materials used, completed solar cells can
be aged in an accelerated lifetime setup. Up to 64 samples can be aged simultaneously while
their temperature and the light intensity are tracked continuously. The LED light source for
this characterization can reach up to 15 times the sun's light intensity.
All tasks described in this chapter can be performed fully automated by the system, in
arbitrary order and without human intervention. With these tasks the L1 hardware platform is
able to conduct any solution based thin film process which involves techniques like mixing of
solutions, processing layers and performing complete sample characterization.
Mapping the OPV problem onto AMANDA L1
The capabilities of L1 and the means of controlling it flexibly with the AMANDA software
backbone allow performing systematic experiments for the evaluation of solution processed
OPV systems.
In AMANDA all processes necessary to manufacture an OPV cell are considered a sequence
of individual tasks, each of which represents a fixed, completed action with a certain set of
18

parameters. Examples are a thermal treatment of a sample at a certain temperature for a
certain duration or a spin coating task with its processing parameters. The whole experiment
can then be described as an arbitrary list of tasks, which constitute a so-called sequence plan.
Figure 4 shows an example on how one full production and characterization of an OPV
sample is mapped into individual tasks. The sequence plan, represented by the tasks, is stored
in the database and waits as a “print job” to be triggered by an operator. AMANDA then
informs the operator in the lab to load fresh substrates and stock solutions into L1. The
production process starts with a reference measurement of the blank substrate consisting of a
photograph and an absorbance measurement. In parallel to that characterization, the solution
for the first layer is prepared. The desired amounts of the stock solutions are each aspirated
into one of the pipetting channels and dispensed into a common, small container. The
containment is shaken in order to achieve a good blend before the mixture is used in the
process. Subsequently, the first layer is formed by spin coating and in predefined areas
removed again with a cotton swab. This cleansing is required to enable an electrical contact
to the bottom transparent electrode layer for the later conducted electrical characterization.
For this purpose, a cotton swab is picked up by a pipetting channel and wiped over the
substrate short before the layer is thermally annealed. This procedure (characterization and
solution mixing, spin coating, wiping, annealing) is repeated until all solution based layers
are formed. Another optical characterization is conducted before the final top electrode layer
is applied by thermal evaporation. Finally, a current-voltage measurement of the completed
sample is taken in dark and under AM1.5 illumination by utilizing a solar simulator. A
stability measurement can optionally be performed on the solar cells. For this purpose, the
samples are transferred to the module for accelerated aging and exposed to LED light of up to
15 suns. This testing can be interrupted by IV measurements in given intervals based on
illumination exposure, temperature over time or fixed timings to gain insight into the
changing performance behavior. Upon completion of the whole process, the sample is
automatically transferred into a storage unit.
The above description shows the process for one individual sample. In L1 and in other
systems on the AMANDA Platform we work in batches of 6 or 8 samples to allow
parallelization and increase throughput.
19

Fig. 4: Process sequence for an OPV sample fabrication process on L1, divided into
individual processing tasks.
Experimental Results
To demonstrate the capabilities of producing state-of-the-art OPV cells, we present
experimental results from the optimization of the PM6:Y6 bulk heterojunction system in air
performed on AMANDA L1. Three use cases of optimization are described. A concentration
study demonstrates the ability of mixing solutions and feeding them into the sample
production process. In a spin coating study the effect of the deposited solution volume on the
layer quality and sample performance is investigated. Finally a long term reproducibility
study across many processing runs and processing days is performed that shows a small
distribution of measured solar cell performance.
Fully automated OPV process - concentration study
For the study of the effect of active layer thickness on the device performance, automated
experiments were conducted on L1. These were based on the flow chart shown in figure 4 in
order to investigate the dependency of the PM6:Y6 solar cell performance on the thickness of
the active layer. L1 prepared different concentrations of PM6:Y6 solution in chloroform (CF),
varying the solid content. For this purpose three stock solutions, based on chloroform as the
20

main solvent, and 1-chloronaphthalene (CN) as additive (0.5%), were prepared manually in
vials and fed into the system. A PM6 solution, a Y6 solution and a vial of CF:CN solvent
mixture. These solutions were automatically mixed, according to the schematic in figure 5b.
While the PM6:Y6 ratio was kept constant to 1:1.2 in this experiment, the total solid content
of the solution was varied. The prepared solutions were subsequently spin coated and
characterized. The results of this experiment are shown in figure 5c.
Fig. 5: a) Chemical structure of PM6 and Y6. b) Inline mixing of spin coating solution as
used in this experiment: 3 stock solutions are provided to the pipetting robot; the solutions
are deposited with 3 individual pipetting steps together in one well of a well plate with ratios
according to the experimental plan; the well plate is shaken to blend the solutions; the liquid
handling robot aspirates the solution from the well and dispenses it in the spin coating
process. c) Concentration study for OPV performance of PM6:Y6 solar cells plotted as a
function of the optical density of the active layer. The blue line is a locally estimated
scatterplot smoothing curve (LOESS)[56].
The optical density (OD) was extracted from absorbance measurements of the sample before
and after active layer spin coating. Since there are 6 independent solar cell devices on each
sample, the OD values are measured for each of the 6 positions on the substrate where the
21

active solar cell areas will be located. The absolute difference of the OD before and after spin
coating was calculated at the PM6 absorption peak wavelength of 620 nm. The OD values
and the solar cell performance values are plotted against each other in figure 5c for each of
the six cells on the sample. The plot gives an insight into the layer thickness dependence of
the solar cell performance.
As anticipated, the fill factor (FF) and the open circuit voltage (VOC) decreases as the active
layer film thickness increases. In contrast to that, the short circuit current (Jsc) drops for
thinner layers. For thicker active layers the Jsc rises until it reaches its maximum at an OD of
around 0.65. The power conversion efficiency (PCE) is a combination of the previous values
and shows a maximum at an OD of around 0.55.
First data of the automated experimentation on L1 is presented in this study. The solution for
the active layer was mixed inline by the liquid handling robots, short before spin coating it
onto the sample. Thus, we were able to examine the dependency of the layer thickness with
the solar cell performance. The optimum concentration of solid content was found around
16.5 mg/ml. For this procedure only the stock solutions were prepared by hand as the liquid
handling robot created the appropriate mixture. With this generic approach, we are able to
continuously probe the complete compositional space automatically, even for very complex,
high-dimensional problems.
Spin coating parameter study - volume
To explore the possibility of minimizing material consumption we varied the amount of
solution deposited on the sample to form the active layer during a dynamic spin coating
process. In our manual routines we tend to use a solution volume (Vspin) of 50 µl for our
25 x 25 mm substrates. For this experiment, we used 50 µl as a starting point and reduced it
down to 5 µl. A set of pictures taken of the active layer films while systematically decreasing
the Vspin is shown in figure 6a. For volumes at or below 15 µl one can see clearly that the
substrate surface is not fully covered anymore with the wet film, which leads to torn films
towards the outside of the substrates. This behavior is expected and can be easily explained
by the insufficient amount of applied material.
The layer quality however seems to decrease again for higher volumes of 30 µl and above as
the films tend to be increasingly inhomogeneous and show features that resemble drying
stains. These artifacts in all likelihood result from too much solution in those particular spots.
This excess solution is not pushed off the substrate fast enough by centrifugal forces and
dries inhomogeneously on the sample surface. To avoid this behavior, the removal rate of the
excess solution has to be higher than the rate of the solution’s solvent evaporation.
22

Fig. 6: a) Photographs of PM6:Y6 layers spin coated automatically on AMANDA L1 while
varying Vspin from 5 µl to 50 µl. b) Solar cell performance of the samples shown in (a), plotted
over Vspin.
Adjusting the parameters, e.g. solvent, solvent additives, liquid volume, spin coating velocity,
etc. can help to reach an optimal, homogeneous film as well as having an effect on the
composition and morphology. In this experiment, we used chloroform which has a very high
evaporation rate due to its low boiling point. Since the morphology formation of PM6:Y6
layers is strongly dependent on the choice of the processing solvent, a change to high boiling
solvents is detrimental [57]. The control of the layer thickness is therefore made possible by
changing the spin coating velocity, the solid content and the amount of used solvent.
Nevertheless those parameters can also influence the drying kinetics and thus lead to a
different microstructure of the resulting film. It is therefore important that those parameters
can be adjusted individually when trying to find optimal process conditions.
Altogether in our experiments, the layers with the best visual appearance are formed with a
Vspin of 20 µl and 25 µl. In figure 6b the solar cell performance is plotted as a function of the
Vspin and a similar behavior as compared to the photographs can be observed. For 5 µl, the
performance drops dramatically, as the active layer film coverage over all the solar cells of a
sample is not given. For 30 µl and 40 µl the performance varies especially in fill factor and
short circuit current, which can be attributed to poor layer homogeneity. Overall the best
23

results were achieved with volumes of 20 and 25 µl. This is half of the amount used in our
manual processes and shows L1 can decrease the necessary material quantities per substrate
by 50%. As a consequence, the automated system can reduce the material consumption and
perform twice the amount of experiments with the same amount of given material.
Demonstrating the reproducibility of L1
Each processing day we process at least one PM6:Y6 reference sample to control the
reproducibility of the system. The process parameters of these control-samples are constant,
although they are processed on different days with changes in ambient conditions, base
solution and time. The diagram in figure 7, is composed of the data acquired from such
reference samples over a three-month observation period and 19 different experimental runs.
On each of those 19 reference samples there are 6 solar cells. The cells are considered
functional if an open circuit voltage (VOC) over 0.3 V and a fill factor (FF) over 0.4 were
reached. This condition was achieved by 105 of the 114 solar cells, leading to a rate of 92%
functional solar cells.
Fig. 7: a) Distribution of the solar cell performance of PM6:Y6 reference samples from 19
separate experiments over a 3-months period. Statistics are shown as box plots with a
maximum whisker length of 1.5 times interquartile range. Additionally the data points of the
single solar cells are shown as a scatter plot, and their distribution as violin plot. B)
JV-Curves of the 19 samples, each with 6 solar cells. The most efficient solar cell of each
sample is plotted bold. c) Architecture of the solar cells used in this publication. Layer stack
is: Glass, indium tin oxide, zinc oxide nanoparticles, active layer of PM6:Y6, molybdenum
oxide and silver.
The photovoltaic median performance and the interquartile range of the functional solar cells
is shown in table 1. The open circuit voltage (VOC) shows a very small interquartile range of
0.013 V with a median value of 0.825 V. The median(interquartile range) of the short circuit
24

current
(JSC),
fill
factor
(FF)
and
the
power
conversion
efficiency
(PCE)
are
23,2(1,03) mA/cm², 0.671(0.022) and 12.9(0.74)% respectively.
The VOC value of these samples is equal to the ones in the publication of Yuan et al [25].
However short circuit current (~-2 mA/cm²), fill factor (~-0.1) and thus the power conversion
efficiency (~-2.8%) are below the hero performances reported in the literature. In contrast to
the solar cells of Yuan et al., the solar cell areas described in this publication are 2.5 times as
large though. In addition, the samples were completely processed under ambient conditions in
the present work.
Table 1: Maximum, Median and interquartile range values for PM6:Y6 organic solar cells,
processed completely automated on AMANDA L1. The shown samples were produced with
the same parameter settings in 19 separate experiments, over a 3-months period.
VOC [V]
JSC [mA/cm²]
FF
PCE [%]
Maximum
0.849
24.8
0.708
13.79
Median
0.825
23.2
0.671
12.9
interquartile range
0.013
1.03
0.022
0.74
Compared to other PM6:Y6 devices processed under ambient conditions, the solar cells
fabricated in this publication are also quite comparable. Sun et al. reported a maximum
efficiency of blade-coated PM6:Y6 bulk-heterojunction solar cells of 15.37% for small
devices of 0.04 cm² area and 14.01% for larger area devices with 1 cm² active area [37].
AI based performance and stability prediction on LineOne
An application example outside the scope of this publication was presented by Du et al.
where AMANDA and LineOne were used to investigate the efficiency and stability of
PM6:Y6 solar cells as a function of different process parameters. During the production of
the solar cells the absorption of each active layer was measured. After the evaporation of
electrodes, the IV characteristic of all samples were obtained and a portion of the samples
were subsequently aged for 50 hours at one sun. The data from the absorption spectra of the
active layer was used to deconvolute the spectrum into single features, representing different
properties of the active layer blend. Based on these features a Gaussian Process Regression
(GPR) model was trained to predict performance and stability. They showed that the GPR
25

model was able to predict the device performance (especially VOC) and the photostability with
high accuracy. From the model the authors identified the molecular ordering as key for the
optimization of the produced solar cells. Thin active layers with medium annealing
temperatures were found to be beneficial for both initial performance and photostability of
the investigated material system [58].
Challenges and Opportunities of AMANDA and the laboratory of the
future
Developing a fully automated research facility like L1 is a challenging task in many aspects.
In order to start a process with solutions and conclude with fully evaluated solar cells, the
whole process chain has to be broken down into many subtasks that need to be automated and
coordinated. Every action usually performed by an operator needs to be mapped onto an
automated system with rather limited degrees of freedom.
While not obvious at first hand, the biggest challenges for integrating an OPV process into L1
were rather the small things that usually go unnoticed. Good examples for this are trivial
actions like opening up a screw capped vial, wiping away a stripe of a 200 nm thick layer of
polymer or even just putting a shadow mask onto some substrates and turning that stack
around. Those tasks are straightforward for humans with 27 joints [18, 19] in one hand alone.
But for a single 6 axis robot with a binary-state open/close gripper it is not simple at all. As
we implemented the OPV fabrication process on L1 we broke down the whole process into
50 single tasks which can be executed natively by one of the integrated devices (see table
S2). However, for several tasks we adapted and validated alternative approaches, or had to
devise attachments and workarounds. For the opening of vials, we exchanged screw caps for
rubber corks, which can be picked up by one of the pipetting channels with a special adapter
(figure S2b). In a similar fashion we also designed adapters that are fitted with cotton swabs
for the pipetting channels in order to remove stripes of the coated polymer layers (figure S2a).
A further challenge we faced was the integration and automation of equipment originally
designed for regular laboratory use. Common laboratory machines are typically designed for
manual operation and are often not suited for the use in automated systems. Apart from
transport of samples between and the placement into the equipment the hardware interfaces
and software communication protocols needed special attention. AMANDA controls about
150 single devices of 37 different types in L1. To interface with that variety of hardware the
remote connections needed to be converted to a common standard. In AMANDA’s case the
ethernet network was selected as communication standard, both for scalability as well as the
centralized server based control from a Linux environment.
Since all the integrated devices were selected by their functionality for the process and not on
the availability of their documentation, a significant effort has gone into the proper
implementation
of
communication
protocols.
As
a
result
a
vast
library
of basic
26

implementations for nearly any connection type is part of the framework that allows very
quick integration of new devices at this point. However, a small number of vendors have
proven to be rather unwilling to share the specifications of their devices which required the
reverse engineering of their protocols and devices. We strongly advocate the use of a
common standard in laboratory equipment, one approach has been shown for example with
the SiLA standard [59].
Despite these challenges the advantages of an automated and integrated system make the
effort worthwhile. The complete automation improves the process reproducibility as well as
the quality and especially the completeness of the acquired data for each sample. In addition,
a generic toolkit like AMANDA, which has now proven its capabilities on OPV, can very
easily be adapted to tackle questions in other fields of materials science like e.g. quantum
dots,
perovskite
solar
cells,
thermoelectrics,
catalysts,
batteries
or fuel cells. The
comprehensive, structured collection of data with unique identifiers in machine readable
formats generated by MAPs like L1 or other AMANDA facilities is the foundation for
deploying artificial intelligence to solve materials science questions. This enables the
efficient (multi-objective-) optimum search in vast high dimensional spaces of materials
composition and process conditions. This approach is likely to significantly accelerate the
discovery and commercialization of new functional materials in the future.
A further important aspect for the acceleration of materials science is parallelization in
conjunction with connectivity. The AMANDA software backbone allows the simultaneous
control of multiple hardware research facilities and respectively various hardware devices
which can be operated either in parallel, or be combined into a larger sequence. This makes it
possible to create virtually connected cloud laboratories and cross platform integration of
data, providing scalability for addressing complex and important materials science problems,
which has never been available before. The flexible, web-based process design and the
experiment-as-a-service approach of AMANDA provides full process control and data access
for scientists, independently of their actual location opening a path to truly distributed
research. A specialized facility like L1 in the AMANDA environment could allow researchers,
which otherwise would never have access to such research equipment, to test their ideas on a
service level, extending an approach that has been commonly used for computational
investigations on supercomputers into materials science facilities. As such it provides
scalability with regards to the utilization of intellectual potential.
A further property the automation approach shares with computing is scalability of
processing resources. Training a skilled operator on complex tasks takes years. However,
when an automated facility exists it is possible to simply reproduce the facility in order to
double the throughput while still providing exactly the same quality of operation. Apart from
that optimization of existing facilities also has a large potential. In our implementation of L1
there are still significant capacity increases possible through the implementation of further
parallelization in L1. While current “process runs” on L1 typically encompass 6 batches of 6
samples each in a typical workday, which sums up to 36 samples. Since every sample is
divided in 6 parts and each part contains an independent solar cell device, this estimates to
27

216 solar cells. However, this does not reflect the potential throughput of the facility. With a
more sophisticated scheduling algorithm for parallel processed batches L1 would be able to
process 9 batches on a regular work day of 8 hours. The batch size can also be increased to 8
samples, that would make it possible to process 72 samples (≙432 solar cells) in a single
shift on a normal working day (compare figure S3). In continuous operation up to 34 batches
could be processed in 24 hours, which corresponds to 272 samples (≙1632 solar cells). All
this could already be achieved with minimal hardware changes. In a sequential automated
process it is always the process with the longest cycle time that limits the throughput. In the
case of L1, the evaporator is the limiting factor at the moment. With a cycle time of 42
minutes per batch a maximum of 34 evaporations per day can be achieved. To overcome this
bottleneck, multiple batches would need to be evaporated at the same time, giving L1 the
ability to roughly double its throughput to ca. 500 samples with ca. 3000 devices per day. To
go beyond this, the setup would need to be reproduced, which is much simpler and faster than
the initial development, since from day one it would benefit from all the “knowledge”
acquired with the previous setups.
Conclusion
Automation and artificial intelligence enhanced discovery and qualification of new materials
plays an increasingly important role in materials science. In this publication we reviewed the
development of Materials Acceleration Platforms over the past decade. Using a generalized
classification, we compared selected MAPs and examined the degree of automation of the
individual stages of material development. We concluded that interconnected, multi-stage
MAPs, reinforced with artificial intelligence are the way to the automated lab of the future.
As one step towards this goal we presented the AMANDA platform, a framework for
autonomous laboratory research, and the hardware facility L1, a full-scale Materials
Acceleration Platform for generalized and flexible materials research. AMANDA together
with the hardware implementation L1 has reached a maturity, where fully automated
processing of organic solar cell devices is conducted on a daily basis. The software backbone
of AMANDA follows the experiment-as-a-service approach that abstracts design of
experiment from automated execution and allows researchers to focus on data and evaluation.
We discussed the large potential of flexible automation for science and demonstrated how to
transfer a complex laboratory process onto a robotic platform. The functionality of L1 was
demonstrated on the hand of automatically manufacturing solar cells with the PM6:Y6
material system, achieving efficiencies for ambient atmosphere processing of up to 13.7%
under AM1.5 illumination. The precision of the platform was used to investigate the
influence on performance of different parameters that are difficult to access with manual lab
work. Specifically the effect of semiconductor concentration in the solution used for spin
coating, as well as the effect of the solution volume deposited for spin coating, were
investigated. Optimal process parameters could easily be extracted from the results.
Furthermore, the reproducibility of this system is demonstrated with repeated production runs
of the PM6:Y6 material system, showing an interquartile range of 0.74% in PCE for 108
28

individual cells on 19 substrates which were processed as reference samples in 19 individual
processing runs performed over the course of 3 months.
AMANDA together with the Materials Acceleration Platform L1 is a work in progress, yet
already now demonstrate the capabilities of such systems. Despite the fact that they are able
to perform all the functions to manufacture lab scale solution-based solar cells automatically,
new features are still being added, and the production capacity is continuously increased.
Recently, a stability screening module was integrated in L1 which is capable of accelerated
aging of up to 64 samples in parallel at 15 suns max. Its integration allows the determination
of efficiency potential, processing parameters and stability for a new material in one process.
In general we expect that AMANDA will be capable of generating enough devices and data
for AI algorithms to understand the underlying model of properties and processing conditions
of a new material system within one to two processing days. However, to further speed up
this process, we believe that the data for the AI computations must be extended beyond the
current experimental loop and include the knowledge from other (previous) experiments as
well. By finding similarities in the chemical composition of the material systems we are
looking to bias the prediction model to quicker converge towards optima.
A further step for AMANDA and L1 will be the completion of the discussed materials
development process by including the synthesis stage. We believe that by synthesizing,
processing and long-term evaluating materials in-line in one MAP, screening of their
structure-property relationship will be drastically accelerated.
We believe that with MAPs a paradigm shift in materials research is imminent. Automation
and AI will change the way how research is conducted over the next decade. Driven by
systems like AMANDA with hardware research facilities like L1, integrated Materials
Acceleration Platforms provide researchers with unprecedented means of experimentation
and challenge them to think in new ways within the laboratory of the future. This has a major
potential to revolutionize materials science, accelerate the discovery of new functional
materials and decrease the time to market -- in the best sense of the materials genome
initiative (MGI).
Supplementary Material
See the supplementary material for more information about process tasks, used devices and a
more comprehensive view of parallel execution of multiple batches on L1.
29

Data Availability
The data supporting the results of this study are available from the corresponding author upon
reasonable request.
Acknowledgement
The authors want to thank the Deutsche Forschungsgemeinschaft (DFG) for financial support
in scope of the DFG INST 90/917-1 FUGG and DFG BR 4031/13-1. We also gratefully
acknowledge the grants “ELF-PV - Design and development of solution processed functional
materials for the next generations of PV technologies” (No. 44-6521a/20/4) and “Solar
Factory of the Future” (FKZ 20.2-3410.5-4-5) by the Bavarian State Government.
Conflict of Interest
The authors declare no conflict of interest.
Appendix: Experimental
All processing steps were performed in ambient atmosphere, except for the preparation of
PM6:Y6 stock solutions and thermal annealing of active layer for the reproducibility runs.
The organic solar cells fabricated for this work were deposited on indium tin oxide covered
glass substrates with a sheet resistance of 7-9 Ω/sq. Before usage the substrates were cleaned
in an ultrasonic bath for 10 minutes in purified water, acetone and 2-propanol respectively.
For all solar cells an inverted architecture was used with the first layer comprised of zinc
oxide nanoparticles (ZnO-NP), spin coated automatically on L1 with 3000 rpm, in the
quasi-static on-the-fly spin coating mode. The solution was purchased from Avantama and
was treated prior to usage with an ultrasonic horn for 60 seconds before filtering with a
0.2 µm PTFE syringe filter. The ZnO-NP layer was post treated at 200°C for 5 minutes. After
optical characterization of that first layer, the active layer was deposited. Therefore a
chloroform stock solution was prepared with 99.5 vol% chloroform and 0.5 vol% of
1-chloronaphthalene. PM6 and Y6 purchased from Derthon were diluted in parts of the
chloroform stock solution respectively, forming two additional stock solutions with a solid
content of 20 mg/ml each. These three solutions were mixed by the pipetting robot before
usage. The ratio of PM6 and Y6 was 1:1.2 for all shown devices, the total solid content was
varied between 10 and 20 mg/ml (16 mg/ml for the reference samples). The active layer was
spin coated in dynamic spin coating mode on L1 at a rotation velocity of 3500 rpm. The used
solution amount was varied between 5 µl and 50 µl. The pipette to substrate distance during
30

ink dispensation was fixed to 50 mm. A dispense speed of 500 µl/s was used. The active layer
was thermally annealed at 100°C for 10 minutes and optically characterized after annealing.
Then the samples were transported to the evaporator. A shadow mask was applied to the
substrates leading to an active area of the solar cells of 10.4 mm². The substrates were loaded
into
the
evaporation
chamber and molybdenum oxide and silver were evaporated
subsequently with a waiting time of 2 minutes in between the two evaporation processes. The
molybdenum oxide was evaporated with a rate of 0.1 Å/s for the first 2 nm, then with 0.2 Å/s
until a final film thickness of 10 nm was reached. For silver an initial rate of 0.5 Å/s was used
for the first 10 nm, after that the rate was increased to 3 Å/s until a total film thickness of
100 nm was reached. The solar cell performance was measured automatically in L1 under an
AM1.5 spectrum provided by a Newport LSH-7320 class ABA LED solar simulator, and
additionally measured by a Wavelabs Sinus-70 class AAA LED solar simulator manually.
References
1.
Hitomi K (1994) Automation — its concept and a short history. Technovation 14:121–128
2.
Popkova EG, Ragulina YV, Bogoviz AV (2018) Industry 4.0: Industrial Revolution of the 21st
Century. Springer
3.
Olsen K (2012) The first 110 years of laboratory automation: technologies, applications, and the
creative scientist. J Lab Autom 17:469–480
4.
Felder RA (2006) The Clinical Chemist: Masahide Sasaki, MD, PhD (August 27,
1933–September 23, 2005). Clinical Chemistry 52:791–792
5.
Sasaki M (1993) A fully automated clinical laboratory. Chemometrics and Intelligent Laboratory
Systems 21:159–168
6.
Hawker CD (2007) Laboratory automation: total and subtotal. Clin Lab Med 27:749–70, vi
7.
National Research Council (US) Office of Special Projects (2014) Issues for Science and
Engineering Researchers in the Digital Age. National Academies Press (US), Washington (DC)
8.
National Science And Technology (2011) Materials Genome Initiative for Global
Competitiveness. Books LLC
9.
Aspuru-Guzik A, Tribukait-Vasconcelos H (2018) Materials Acceleration Platform Accelerating
Advanced Energy Materials Discovery by Integrating High-Throughput Methods with Artificial
Intelligence Report of the Clean Energy Materials Innovation Challenge Expert Workshop.
Mission Innovation
10. Nikolaev P, Hooper D, Webber F, et al (2016) Autonomy in materials research: a case study in
carbon nanotube growth. npj Computational Materials 2
11. Chan EM, Xu C, Mao AW, et al (2010) Reproducible, high-throughput synthesis of colloidal
nanocrystals for optimization in multidimensional parameter space. Nano Lett 10:1874–1885
12. Walter H, Basset G, Beierlein T, et al (2010) Combinatorial approach for fast screening of
31

functional materials. Journal of Polymer Science Part B: Polymer Physics 48:1587–1593
13. Burger B, Maffettone PM, Gusev VV, et al (2020) A mobile robotic chemist. Nature
583:237–241
14. Pendleton IM, Cattabriga G, Li Z, et al (2019) Experiment Specification, Capture and Laboratory
Automation Technology (ESCALATE): a software pipeline for automated chemical
experimentation and data management. MRS Communications 9:846–859
15. MacLeod BP, Parlane FGL, Morrissey TD, et al (2020) Self-driving laboratory for accelerated
discovery of thin-film materials. Science Advances 6.: https://doi.org/10.1126/sciadv.aaz8867
16. Zunger A (2018) Inverse design in search of materials with target functionalities. Nature
Reviews Chemistry 2
17. Baker M (2016) 1,500 scientists lift the lid on reproducibility. Nature 533:452–454
18. Paulsen F, Waschke J (2018) Sobotta Tables of Muscles, Joints and Nerves, English/Latin: Tables
to 16th Ed. of the Sobotta Atlas. Fischer Gustav Verlag GmbH & Company KG
19. Sobotta J, Hersey Thomas W (2018) Atlas and Text-Book of Human Anatomy: Bones,
Ligaments, Joints, and Muscles. Franklin Classics
20. Darling SB, You F (2013) The case for organic photovoltaics. RSC Advances 3:17633
21. Yu G, Gao J, Hummelen JC, et al (1995) Polymer Photovoltaic Cells: Enhanced Efficiencies via
a Network of Internal Donor-Acceptor Heterojunctions. Science 270:1789–1791
22. Wadsworth A, Moser M, Marks A, et al (2019) Critical review of the molecular design progress
in non-fullerene electron acceptors towards commercially viable organic solar cells. Chem Soc
Rev 48:1596–1625
23. Zhang M, Guo X, Ma W, et al (2015) A Large-Bandgap Conjugated Polymer for Versatile
Photovoltaic Applications with High Performance. Adv Mater 27:4655–4660
24. Fan B, Zhang D, Li M, et al (2019) Achieving over 16% efficiency for single-junction organic
solar cells. Science China Chemistry 62:746–752
25. Yuan J, Zhang Y, Zhou L, et al (2019) Single-Junction Organic Solar Cell with over 15%
Efficiency Using Fused-Ring Acceptor with Electron-Deficient Core. Joule 3:1140–1151
26. Sun C, Pan F, Qiu B, et al (2020) D–A Copolymer Donor Based on Bithienyl Benzodithiophene
D-Unit and Monoalkoxy Bifluoroquinoxaline A-Unit for High-Performance Polymer Solar Cells.
Chemistry of Materials 32:3254–3261
27. Ma R, Liu T, Luo Z, et al (2020) Improving open-circuit voltage by a chlorinated polymer donor
endows binary organic solar cells efficiencies over 17%. Science China Chemistry 63:325–330
28. Cai F, Zhu C, Yuan J, et al (2020) Efficient organic solar cells based on a new “Y-series”
non-fullerene acceptor with an asymmetric electron-deficient-core. Chemical Communications
56:4340–4343
29. Liu Q, Jiang Y, Jin K, et al (2020) 18% Efficiency organic solar cells. Science Bulletin
65:272–275
32

30. Lin Y, Nugraha MI, Firdaus Y, et al (2020) A Simple n-Dopant Derived from Diquat Boosts the
Efficiency of Organic Solar Cells to 18.3%. ACS Energy Letters 3663–3671
31. Meredith P, Li W, Armin A (2020) Nonfullerene Acceptors: A Renaissance in Organic
Photovoltaics? Advanced Energy Materials 10:2001788
32. Pan M-A, Lau T-K, Tang Y, et al (2019) 16.7%-efficiency ternary blended organic photovoltaic
cells with PCBM as the acceptor additive to increase the open-circuit voltage and phase purity.
Journal of Materials Chemistry A 7:20713–20722
33. Yan T, Ge J, Lei T, et al (2019) 16.55% efficiency ternary organic solar cells enabled by
incorporating a small molecular donor. Journal of Materials Chemistry A 7:25894–25899
34. Yang T, Ma R, Cheng H, et al (2020) A compatible polymer acceptor enables efficient and stable
organic solar cells as a solid additive. Journal of Materials Chemistry A 8:17706–17712
35. Gasparini N, Paleti SHK, Bertrandie J, et al (2020) Exploiting Ternary Blends for Improved
Photostability in High-Efficiency Organic Solar Cells. ACS Energy Letters 5:1371–1379
36. Inganäs O (2018) Organic Photovoltaics over Three Decades. Adv Mater 30:e1800388
37. Sun R, Wu Q, Guo J, et al (2020) A Layer-by-Layer Architecture for Printable Organic Solar
Cells Overcoming the Scaling Lag of Module Efficiency. Joule 4:407–419
38. Bohacek RS, McMartin C, Guida WC (1996) The art and practice of structure-based drug design:
A molecular modeling perspective. Medicinal Research Reviews 16:3–50
39. Yener KA, Aslihan Yener K, Vandiver PB (1993) Tin Processing at Göltepe, an Early Bronze
Age Site in Anatolia. American Journal of Archaeology 97:207
40. Zulehner W (1989) Czochralski Growth of Silicon. Semiconductor Silicon 2–23
41. Merrifield RB, Stewart JM, Jernberg N (1966) Instrument for automated synthesis of peptides.
Anal Chem 38:1905–1914
42. Lindsey JS (1992) A retrospective on the automation of laboratory synthetic chemistry.
Chemometrics and Intelligent Laboratory Systems 17:15–45
43. King RD, Rowland J, Oliver SG, et al (2009) The automation of science. Science 324:85–89
44. Sparkes A, Aubrey W, Byrne E, et al (2010) Towards Robot Scientists for autonomous scientific
discovery. Autom Exp 2:1
45. Rao R, Pierce N, Liptak D, et al (2013) Revealing the impact of catalyst phase transition on
carbon nanotube growth by in situ Raman spectroscopy. ACS Nano 7:1100–1107
46. Nikolaev P, Hooper D, Perea-López N, et al (2014) Discovery of wall-selective carbon nanotube
growth conditions via automated experimentation. ACS Nano 8:10214–10222
47. Li J, Ballmer SG, Gillis EP, et al (2015) Synthesis of many different types of organic small
molecules using one automated process. Science 347:1221–1226
48. Steiner S, Wolf J, Glatzel S, et al (2019) Organic synthesis in a modular robotic system driven by
a chemical programming language. Science 363:eaav2211
33

49. Chen S, Hou Y, Chen H, et al (2018) Exploring the Stability of Novel Wide Bandgap Perovskites
by a Robot Based High Throughput Approach. Adv Energy Mater 8:1701543
50. Xie C, Tang X, Berlinghof M, et al (2018) Robot-Based High-Throughput Engineering of
Alcoholic Polymer: Fullerene Nanoparticle Inks for an Eco-Friendly Processing of Organic Solar
Cells. ACS Appl Mater Interfaces 10:23225–23234
51. Roch LM, Häse F, Kreisbeck C, et al (2018) ChemOS: Orchestrating autonomous
experimentation. Science Robotics 3:eaat5559
52. Langner S, Häse F, Perea JD, et al (2020) Beyond Ternary OPV: High-Throughput
Experimentation and Self-Driving Laboratories Optimize Multicomponent Systems. Adv Mater
32:e1907801
53. González-R PL, Framinan JM, Pierreval H (2012) Token-based pull production control systems:
an introductory overview. Journal of Intelligent Manufacturing 23:5–22
54. Wilkinson MD, Dumontier M, Jan Aalbersberg I, et al (2019) Addendum: The FAIR Guiding
Principles for scientific data management and stewardship. Sci Data 6:6
55. American National Standards Institute (2004) ANSI/SBS 1-2004: Footprint Dimensions
56. Cleveland WS, Grosse E, Shyu WM (2017) Local Regression Models. Statistical Models in S
309–376
57. Zhu L, Zhang M, Zhou G, et al (2020) Non‐Fullerene Acceptors: Efficient Organic Solar Cell
with 16.88% Efficiency Enabled by Refined Acceptor Crystallization and Morphology with
Improved Charge Transfer and Transport Properties (Adv. Energy Mater. 18/2020). Advanced
Energy Materials 10:2070083
58. Du X, Lüer L, Heumüller T, et al (2021) Elucidating the full potential of OPV materials utilizing
a high - throughput robot - based platform and machine learning. Joule 5:495–506
59. Bär H, Hochstrasser R, Papenfub B (2012) SiLA: Basic standards for rapid integration in
laboratory automation. J Lab Autom 17:86–95
34

Supporting Information
Fig. S1: The two spin coating modes available on L1: a) quasi static mode
(on-the-fly) were the solution is distributed onto the substrate with dispense speed d,
while the tip moves linearly over the substrates surface with speed x and the spin
coater rotates slowly with velocity rslow. The substrate then accelerates to the target
velocity rtarget. b) dynamic mode. The tip is in distance l over the substrate center, the
spin coater is rotating at target velocity rtarget while the solution is dispensed with
dispense speed d.
Table S1: List of all devices in L1 controlled by AMANDA.
Amount
Category
Device
5
Infrastructure
Remote Controllable Power Distribution Unit
2
Robot
Liquid Handling Robot (Hamilton Starlet)
2
Robot
SCARA Robot
8
Device
Heatshaker
1
Device
Heatshaker with Gripping Mechanism
1
Virtual
WaitDevice
35

1
Virtual
MySQLDevice
1
Virtual
TestDevice
1
Virtual
TokenDevice
1
Virtual
MachineLearningDevice
1
Measurement
Industrial Grade Camera
1
Measurement
UV VIS Spectrometer (Molecular Devices Spectramax M2e)
1
Device
Solar Simulator (Wavelabs Sinus-70)
3
Device
Magnetic Stirrer with Heating
2
Measurement
Source Measurement Unit
1
Robot
Rotation-Centric 6 Axis Robot
2
Measurement
Scale
1
Film Application
Doctor Blade
3
Film Application
Spin Coater
1
Device
Heat Sealer
13
Infrastructure
Surveillance Cameras
1
Device
Photo Light Table
4
Sensor
Raspberry Pi + Sensors
8
Connectors
RS232 to Ethernet Adapters
7
Infrastructure
Gigabit Network Switches
3
Infrastructure
Lights inside Glovebox
11
Infrastructure
Network controllable relay
1
Infrastructure
Signal Post
2
Device
Hot Plate (in Sluice)
36

2
Device
Sluice
7
Infrastructure
Airlock Doors
1
Device
XYZ-Stage
1
Film Application
Evaporator (Leybold Univex 250)
1
Film Application
Evaporator Film Controller
1
Measurement
Measurement SMU Switch
48
Stability
LED Light Controller
3
Infrastructure
Radiator
Table S2: List of all processing tasks necessary to fabricate and characterize organic solar
cells in AMANDA L1, ordered after their first occurence in the standard process (compare
figure 4). Some of the steps appear multiple times at different stages during the process.
Task
Equipment Involved
parameters
Task description
1
Register
substrates
and
substrate carrier
AMANDA Control
substrate type
Generate a virtual entity
for substrate carrier and
its containing samples
and assigns sample IDs
2
Pick up substrate carrier
SCARA Transport Robot
carrier ID
Pick
up
a
substrate
carrier, identified by its
ID
3
Put down substrate carrier
SCARA Transport Robot
target position
Put the substrate carrier
to the target position
4
Pick up vial holder
SCARA Transport Robot
vial holder ID
Pick up a certain vial
holder, identified by its
ID
37

5
Put down vial holder
SCARA Transport Robot
target position
Put the vial holder to
the target position
6
Turn on heat shaker
Hot plate
target
Temperature,
target shaker intensity
Set target temperature
and shaker intensity of
the hot plate and starts
heating/shaking
7
Pick up single substrate
Pipetting Robot
substrate ID
Pick
up
a
substrate,
identified by its ID
8
Put down single substrate
Pipetting Robot
target position
Put substrate to target
position
9
Pick up pipetting tip
Pipetting Robot
tip size
Pick up next available
pipetting tip of tip size
10
Decap vial
Pipetting Robot
target vial
Open the target vial
11
Aspirate solution
Pipetting Robot
target
vial, volume,
aspiration
speed,
mixing parameters
Aspiration of solution
into
the pipetting tip
with
the
given
parameters
12
Dispense solution in vial
Pipetting Robot
target
vial, volume,
dispense speed
Dispensing of Solution
into
vial,
e.g.
for
Mixing
of
multiple
solutions
13
Start spin coater
Spin coater
target
velocity,
acceleration, duration
Start
the
rotational
movement of the spin
coater with the given
parameters
14
Dispense
solution
onto
substrate
Pipetting Robot
substrate ID, volume,
dispense
speed,
distance
from
substrate,
distance
from substrate center
Dispense solution onto
a
substrate,
the
substrate
can be still
(=drop
casting),
or
rotated
by
the
spin
coater (= dynamic spin
coating)
15
Dispense
solution
onto
substrate -- on-the-fly
Pipetting Robot
substrate ID, volume,
dispense
speed,
distance
from
substrate,
movement
Dispensing
solution
onto a slowly rotating
substrate
in
the
spin
coater
while
moving
38

speed of pipette
over
it
with
the
pipetting channel
16
Stop spin coater
Spin coater
deceleration
Stop movement of spin
coater
17
Move to take out position
Spin coater
angle
The spin coater rotates
to the angle where the
substrate can be picked
up by the robot arm
18
Cap vial
Pipetting Robot
target vial
Close vial
19
Trash tip
Pipetting Robot
-
Put pipetting tip into
trash bin
20
Pick up fresh cotton swab
Pipetting Robot
-
The
pipette
channel
picks up a fresh cotton
swab adaptor
21
Wipe edges
Pipetting Robot
-
Movement
of
the
attached
cotton
swab
over
the
substrate to
wipe off stripes of the
coated film
22
Put cotton swab back
Pipetting Robot
-
The
cotton
swab
adaptor is put back into
a rack of used adaptors,
the cotton swabs in the
adaptor will be replaced
manually.
23
Transport substrate carrier
to free waiting position
SCARA transport robot
carrier ID
The
transport
robot
picks up the carrier by
its ID and puts it to a
free waiting position
24
Thermal annealing
Hot plate & SCARA transport
robot
target
Temperature,
duration
The
hot
plate
starts
heating up to the target
temperature.
The
transport
robot
then
puts the substrate to the
plate and leaves it there
for
the
annealing
duration
39

25
Cool down samples
SCARA transport robot
-
The hot substrates are
transferred
to
a cold
metal surface.
26
Take quality control image
Inspection
camera
&
Light
table
-
A picture of the whole
substrate carrier is taken
27
Crop individual samples
AMANDA calculations
sample ID
The
edges
of
the
samples
are
detected
and
the
samples
are
cropped and saved into
the DB referenced to
the sample IDs
28
Calculate
layer
homogeneity
AMANDA calculations
measurement ID
The
texture
of
the
cropped images of the
samples
is
analyzed
with
the
Gray-Level
Co-Occurrence
Matrix
Method (GLCM)
29
Measure Absorbance
UV-VIS Spectrometer
sample
ID,
start
wavelength,
end
wavelength,
step
width
Measures an absorption
spectrum
at
certain
points on the sample
with
the
given
parameters
30
Transfer carrier from Box2
to Box3
SCARA transport robots
carrier ID
The carrier is moved
through a sluice from
Box2 to Box3 by both
of the SCARA transpor
robots
31
Put
shadow
mask
to
carrier
SCARA transport robots
carrier ID, mask ID
A shadow mask is put
onto
the
substrate
carrier by the transport
robot
32
Turn carrier/mask stack
6-axis robot
-
The
stack
of
carrier/mask is turned
around 180°
33
Load carrier/mask stack to
evaporation holder
SCARA transport robots
-
The
stack
of
carrier/mask is loaded
to
a
holder
for
the
evaporator
40

34
Open evaporator door
Evaporator
-
The flange door to the
evaporator chamber is
opened
35
Load evaporation holder
into evaporator
6-axis robot
-
The evaporation holder
is
loaded
into
the
evaporator
36
Close Evaporator door
Evaporator
-
The flange door to the
evaporator chamber is
closed
37
Evacuate
evaporation
chamber
Evaporator
target pressure
The pumping procedure
starts and evacuates the
evaporation chamber.
38
Evaporate material
Evaporator
material,
target
thickness,
evaporation
rate,
evaporation profile
The
material
is
evaporated
automatically. The rate
is
controlled
by
an
internal
PID
control
until
the
target
thickness is reached
39
Vent evaporation chamber
Evaporator
-
Evaporation chamber is
vented with nitrogen
40
Unload
evaporation
Holder from evaporator
6-axis robot
-
The evaporation holder
is unloaded from the
evaporator
41
Unload carrier/mask stack
to evaporation holder
SCARA transport robot
-
The
stack
of
carrier/mask
is
taken
out of the evaporation
holder
42
take shadow mask from
carrier
SCARA transport robot
-
The mask is taken away
from the carrier by the
SCARA transport robot
43
Turn on Solar simulator
Solar simulator
light intensity
The lamp of the solar
simulator is turned on
with target intensity
44
Drive
sample into light
Linear stage
-
The
substrates
are
located on a x-y-table
41

beam
which moves the active
sample into the middle
of the light beam
45
Contact to sample
Linear stage
-
Electrical
contact
is
made to the solar cells
by a pin board
46
Measure
current-voltage
characteristics
SMU
start
voltage,
end
voltage, step width
A
current-voltage
sweep
of
the
given
parameters is applied to
the solar cell
47
Light induced degradation
LED light controller
light intensity, time,
temperature
The substrates are put
to a free degradation
setup, light is turned on
and
the
sample
is
degraded for the desired
duration.
48
Calculate
solar
cell
performance
AMANDA Calculations
solar cell area
PCE, FF, Jsc, Voc, Rshunt
and Rseries are calculated
from the IV-curve
49
Store substrate Carrier
SCARA transport robot
carrier ID
The
carrier
is
transported to a storage
tower
50
Deregister substrates and
carrier
AMANDA control
carrier ID
The substrates and the
carrier
are
set
to
a
non-active state and are
virtually removed from
the
facility.
Substrate
IDs are persistend, the
measured data will be
still available
42

Fig. S2: a) Cotton swap adaptor mounted onto the pipetting channel, removing a small stripe
of the coated layer to contact the transparent back electrode. b) Left: 1 ml vial capped with a
fluorinated rubber cork adaptor, which can be picked up by a pipetting channel of the
pipetting robot. Middle and right: Bare vial and two cork adaptors.
43

Fig. S3: Parallel processing of OPV devices on 9 substrate carriers (batches) with either 6 or
8 substrates per carrier and 6 solar cells on each substrate.
Figure S3 shows a theoretical throughput of sample batches on AMANDA L1. The processing
time is shown on the y-axis, while the different batches are lined up beside each other on the
x-axis. One batch consists of either 6 or 8 substrates which are carried throughout the
machine on self developed substrate carriers. Each substrate holds 6 OPV devices. The
processing of a single batch takes a bit over 2.5 hours, which would lead to a total of 3
processed batches in a normal working period of 8 hours. AMANDA however offers a
parallelization system which allows L1 to process different batches at different stations at the
same time. The different stations are: spin coating, annealing, optical characterisation,
evaporation and IV-measurement. With the help of this parallelization L1 is able to reach
cycle times of 42 minutes (time span of longest single task) for one batch. This results in a
possible amount of 9 parallel processed batches in an 8 hour period, or even 34 batches in 24
hours assuming continuous production.
44
