Dynamics and Stress Relaxation of Bidisperse Polymer
Melts with Unentangled and Moderately Entangled Chains
Oluseye Adeyemi, Shiping Zhu (朱世平), and Li Xi (奚力)a)
Department of Chemical Engineering, McMaster University, Hamilton, Ontario L8S 4L7,
Canada
Polydispersity is inevitable in industrially produced polymers. Established theories
of polymer dynamics and rheology, however, were mostly built on monodisperse
linear polymers. Dynamics of polydisperse polymers is yet to be fully explored
– especially how chains of diﬀerent lengths aﬀect the dynamics of one another in
a mixture. This study explored the dynamics of bidisperse polymer melts using
molecular dynamics and a bead-spring chain model. Binary mixtures between a
moderately entangled long-chain species and an unentangled or marginally entan-
gled short-chain species were investigated. We found that adding short chains can
signiﬁcantly accelerate the dynamics of the long chains by substantially lessening
their extent of entanglement. Meanwhile, although introducing long chains also
hinders the motion of the short chains, it does not qualitatively alter the nature of
their dynamics – unentangled short chains still follow classical Rouse dynamics even
in a matrix containing entangled chains. Detailed Rouse mode analysis was used
to reveal the eﬀects of entanglement at chain segments of diﬀerent scales. Stress
relaxation following a step shear strain was also studied and semi-empirical mixing
rules that predict the linear viscoelasticity of polydisperse polymers based on that
of monodisperse systems were evaluated with simulation results.
a)coresponding author, E-mail: xili@mcmaster.ca; Web: https://www.xiresearch.org
arXiv:2104.05020v2  [cond-mat.soft]  25 Jun 2021

2
I.
INTRODUCTION
The rheology of polymeric materials depends on their molecular structure. This depen-
dence has been exploited in practical applications for improving melt processability and in
characterizing their molecular weight distributions (MWD)1. The reliability of these appli-
cations requires robust molecular theories capable of relating the rheological properties and
chain relaxation dynamics to the underlying molecular make-up.
For melts of short unentangled chains, their dynamics and viscoelasticity are well de-
scribed by the Rouse model2–4.
When the chains are suﬃciently long and topological
constraints between the chains are signiﬁcant – i.e. entangled chains, the tube model and
reptation concept pioneered by Edwards 5 and de Gennes 6 and further reﬁned by Doi and
Edwards 4 have been used with considerable success. Quantitative discrepancies between
experimental results and the initial tube model have been attributed to the presence of addi-
tional relaxation mechanisms other than reptation7. Additional relaxation mechanisms such
as contour length ﬂuctuation (CLF)4, which describes the retraction and expansion of the
contour length, and constraint release (CR)8,9, which accounts for the loss of entanglements
due to the relaxation of other chains, have improved the quantitative prediction.
These theories have largely been predicated on monodisperse samples. Industrial poly-
mers are polydisperse and extension of these theories to polydisperse samples requires the
understanding of the interplay between the relaxation dynamics of chains with diﬀerent
lengths.
Semi-empirical mixing rules, which weigh the contributions of diﬀerent chain
lengths present in the polydisperse samples, are often used. The double reptation model
tries to capture the eﬀects of polydispersity naturally. Implicit in applying the double rep-
tation model to polydisperse polymers is the assumption that the relaxation dynamics of
each constituent chain length is not altered by the presence of other chains. Various stuides
have shown that this is not the case10–13. Experimentally, it is diﬃcult to generate, e.g.,
strictly bidisperse samples to study the mutual interaction between chains of diﬀerent but
well-deﬁned molecular weights. This problem naturally calls for molecular simulation in
which the constituent chain lengths can be precisely controlled.
The charm of polymer physics problems lies in the fact that detailed chemical structures
are often secondary to generic features of diﬀerent polymers such as chain length and topol-
ogy. For this reason, important behaviors can often be captured in highly-simpliﬁed lattice
models in Monte Carlo (MC) simulation. Baschnagel et al. 14 used a bond-ﬂuctuation model
(BFM) to study bidisperse melts of short unentangled chains. It was found that mixing
chains of diﬀerent lengths does not aﬀect their statics (chain conformation statistics), but
dynamics are noticeably shifted with the shorter chains becoming accelerated and longer
chains slowed down. This conclusion was corroborated by Lin, Mattice, and Von Meer-
wall 15 where a more delicate lattice model was used. Unlike the BFM, which uses a cubic
lattice, the newer model builds on a diamond lattice and the potential energy considers
torsion angle variations according to the rotational isomeric state (RIS) model16.
This
setup allows for the modeling of chemically speciﬁc polymers. The study investigated the
dynamics of polyethylene chains in bidisperse melts at high temperature (453 K) where the
longer species is well within the entangled regime.
Molecular dynamics (MD) is the preferred method when realistic dynamics must be cap-
tured. Oﬀ-lattice models are typically used in MD simulation, among which the bead-spring
chain model pioneered by Kremer and Grest17 has been particularly instrumental. How-
ever, most contributions focused on monodisperse polymer melts17–20 and only a very small
number of studies investigated the eﬀects of polydispersity10,11,21–24. A bidisperse system
provides the simplest case where interactions between diﬀerent chain lengths can be inves-
tigated. Barsky 10 studied chain diﬀusion dynamics in bidisperse mixtures of Kremer-Grest
(KG) model chains and observed that mixing with longer chains reduces the mobility of
the shorter chains while mixing with shorter chains accelerates the motion of longer chains.
The longest chain considered in that study had N = 90 (N is the number of monomeric
units or ”beads”), which is at most only marginally entangled and cannot capture most
entanglement eﬀects. In addition, limited by the computer power at the time, the study

3
only probed the dynamics for a relatively short time period. Bidisperse systems of longer
chains were studied later by Picu and Rakshit22 using a higher-level model which maps 40
KG beads into a single coarse-grained bead. Topological constraints due to entanglement
are modeled by forcing the middle beads to move along the backbone (i.e., reptation) and
only allowing three-dimensional motion in end beads. By construction, the model can only
simulate well-entangled chains. They also found that the presence of surrounding shorter
chains speeds up the dynamics of the longer chains. Because the model does not consider
constraint release, the eﬀect, at least as far their results are concerned, can only be at-
tributed to chain-end eﬀects. Baig et al. 25 also reported that mixing with shorter chains
speeds up the relaxation of longer chains (and vice versa). The study used a more realistic
united-atom model for bidisperse cis-1,4-polybutadiene melts, which retains both CLF and
CR eﬀects, and used the tube and segmental survival probability functions as indicators of
the relaxation of entangled chains. Despite the changing dynamics, it also reported that
static properties of the constraining tubes, including their primitive path conformations, are
not aﬀected by varying the surrounding chain length. Polydisperse polymers with realistic,
albeit very narrow, molecular weight distributions were simulated more recently using a
coarse-grained model for polyethylene23,24. It was found that keeping the weight-average
molecular weight constant, chain dynamics accelerates with polydispersity. Mobility of the
shortest chains increases much faster than the average mobility does with polydispersity,
which leads to CR and faster terminal relaxation.
There has been a particular appetite for probe diﬀusion problems, which study the dy-
namics of a speciﬁc chain type, labeled as the probe species, in a matrix of (usually) another
chain type. This is a special case of binary mixtures where the volume fraction of the probe
type φprobe is suﬃciently low that probe-probe interactions are not important. Such a setup
is designed for studying the eﬀects of matrix chains on the probe. The example most rel-
evant to our study is Wang and Larson 26 which used MD to investigate the dynamics of
a long entangled chain species (primarily NL = 350) in a matrix of a shorter chain species
spanning both unentangled and entangled regimes (NS = 25 to 160).
Both types were
semiﬂexible and the long-chain volume fraction was kept at φL = 0.15 to minimize the en-
tanglement between long chains. The study focused on the CR release eﬀects, which leads
to tube relaxation (described as the Rouse motion of the tube itself), with varying short-
chain length NS. More recently, Shanbhag and Wang 27 used a BFM, MD, and slip-spring
model to simulate the diﬀusion of a probe chain in two types of matrices, one with the same
chain type as the probe and the other with inﬁnitely long chains, designed for studying the
self-diﬀusion and tracer diﬀusion of the probe chain, respectively.
The general conclusion that mutual interactions in a binary mixture result in the acceler-
ation and deceleration of the slower and faster chain species, respectively, not only applies
to mixtures with diﬀerent chain lengths, but also to those of diﬀerent chemical types, which,
for example, was also reported by Kopf, D¨unweg, and Paul 11 where the two chain species
diﬀer in monomeric mass. Interestingly, varying chain topology can lead to more complex
mixing behaviors. Using a BFM, Shanbhag 28 showed that the mobility of a ring probe
polymer changes non-monotonically with increasing length of the linear matrix chains.
In this work, we investigated the dynamics and rheology of bidisperse polymer melts
using the KG bead-spring chain model. MD simulation was performed for binary mixtures
between an entangled chain species (NL = 350) and a shorter, unentangled or marginally
entangled, chain species (NS = 25, 50 and 100 – monodisperse melts of the ﬁrst two are
unentangled and the last one, as shown below, is marginally entangled), as we were partic-
ularly interested in the interplay between chains of diﬀerent dynamical regimes. The chain
lengths under our investigations fall into the same range as studied in Wang and Larson 26.
However, we studied compositions where neither component can be viewed as the probe –
i.e., each chain interacts with other chains of both the same and the opposite type. Two
concentration levels were considered for each NL–NS combination – one has the NL = 350
species as the majority (φL = 0.7) and the other as the minority (φL = 0.3) component.
Compared with previous studies on bidisperse melts with the KG model10,26, our MD sim-
ulations were also substantially longer to cover the entire relaxation spectrum of all chains

4
involved as well as to directly compute the full stress relaxation proﬁle.
We started with the mean-squared displacement as a direct measurement of individual
chain dynamics (section III A). It was followed by a Rouse mode analysis which reveals
departure (or the lack thereof) from the unentangled limit and onset of entanglement in
diﬀerent components of the mixture (section III B). Finally, we examined the stress relax-
ation dynamics of the entire melt and evaluated mixing rules for predicting the relaxation
modulus of the bidisperse system given that of the monodisperse melt of each component
(section III C).
II.
MODELS AND NUMERICAL METHODS
The KG bead-spring model17 was used. Each chain consists of N beads bonded by ﬁnitely
extensible non-linear elastic (FENE) springs3. The potential between bonding beads is
UFENE(r) = −1
2KR0
2ln
"
1 −
 r
R0
2#
+ 4ϵ
σ
r
12
−
σ
r
6
+ 1
4

(1)
where r is the distance between the beads and σ and ϵ are the standard Lennard-Jones
(LJ) length and energy parameters. The ﬁrst term of the equation represents an attractive
potential which models FENE springs between nearest neighbors along the chain with a
maximum bond length R0 = 1.5σ, while the second term models the excluded-volume
repulsion between beads and the term is only included at r ≤21/6σ. The spring constant
K = 30σ/ϵ is chosen to allow a reasonable integration time step while preventing chains
from crossing each other17. Note that compared with the semiﬂexible chains studied in
Wang and Larson 26, our model is fully ﬂexible with no angle potential. This diﬀerence
must be kept in mind for any comparison we make with that study below.
The interaction between non-bonding beads is modeled by the standard LJ potential
ULJ(r) = 4ϵ
σ
r
12
−
σ
r
6
.
(2)
The potential is truncated at r = 2.5σ and shifted by a constant to ensure continuity at
the cutoﬀ.
Note that the original model by Kremer and Grest 17 used a shorter cutoﬀ
of r = 21/6σ, making the interaction between non-bonding beads purely repulsive. This
practice is still widely seen in the polymer dynamics literature, although full LJ potential
including the attraction well is used more often recently29–32. Practically, comparison be-
tween the two approaches found no signiﬁcant diﬀerence in both chain statics and dynamics
when temperature is suﬃciently high29,30 – such as T = 1.0ϵ/kB used in this study (kB is
the Boltzmann constant). Hereinafter, all results will be reported in reduced LJ units in
which length, energy, time, and temperature are scaled by σ, ϵ, τ =
p
mσ2/ϵ , and ϵ/kB,
respectively. For example, the non-dimensional LJ energy and length parameters in eq. (1)
and eq. (2) are both unity. A constant time step of 0.01 (in LJ time units or TUs) is used
for all simulation.
Each monodisperse system contains 50 000 beads and each bidisperse system contains
56 000 beads. The diﬀerence in size here is very small and, for selected monodisperse cases,
we have tested the larger size of 56 000 and found no noticeable size dependence.
For
both mono- and bidisperse systems, the beads were placed in a cubic box with periodic
boundary conditions at a constant bead density of 0.85. The bidisperse systems mix a long-
chain species (NL = 350) with shorter chains of various lengths (NS = 25, 50, or 100) at two
levels of mass (or volume – the constituent beads are identical) fraction: φL = 0.7 and 0.3.
The longer chain is moderately entangled –for reference, the entanglement strand length Ne
for the KG model is in the range of 30 to 80 depending on the method of determination33.
Detailed compositions are listed in Table I.

5
TABLE I: Compositions of bidisperse systems simulated: N, φ, and nc denote the chain
length, mass/volume fraction, and total number of chains of a given species, respectively;
subscripts “L” and “S” denote the longer and shorter component in the mixture,
respectively.
NL
φL
nc, L
NS
φS
nc, S
Total beads
350 0.7
112
25
0.3
672
56000
350 0.7
112
50
0.3
336
56000
350 0.7
112
100 0.3
168
56000
350 0.3
48
25
0.7 1568
56000
350 0.3
48
50
0.7
784
56000
350 0.3
48
100 0.7
392
56000
All the simulations were carried out using the Large-scale Atomic/Molecular Massively
Parallel Simulator (LAMMPS) package34. The initial conﬁguration was generated by ran-
domly placing the speciﬁed number and types of chains in the simulation cell. Generation
of individual chains follows a procedure that is analogous to a self-avoiding walk in a contin-
uum space, which prevents backfolding of successive bonds but still leaves a large number
of bead overlaps. A dissipative particle dynamics (DPD) push-oﬀmethod32, originally pro-
posed by Sliozberg and Andzelm 35, was then used to obtain an equilibrated structure for
production runs. During the DPD run, interaction between non-bonding beads was replaced
by a repulsive potential in the form of
UDPD(r) =



ADPD
2
rc

1 −r
rc

r < rc
0
r ≥rc
.
(3)
Compared with the LJ potential (eq. (2)), which has nearly hard-sphere repulsion at short
range, the DPD potential is much softer. It allows for easier passing of chains and thus fast
relaxation during the initial equilibration steps.
DPD simulation was run at T = 1.0 using a cut-oﬀdistance rc = 1.0. The potential was
initially low with ADPD = 25. At the beginning, restriction was imposed on the maximum
distance each bead can move within one time step which gradually increases from 0.001 to
0.1 over 15 TUs. The restriction was then removed and the simulation was run for another
100 TUs. This was subsequently followed by a gradual ramp of ADPD to 1000 over 5.5 TUs.
The DPD potential was then replaced with the standard LJ potential and MD in an NVT
ensemble was performed for additional 500 TUs during which a random velocity distribution
was reassigned to all beads every 0.5 TUs.
Equilibration quality was examined through the mean square internal displacement
(MSID)

R2(n)

≡

|⃗rj −⃗ri|2
(4)
which measures the square distance between the i-th and j-th monomeric unit of the same
chain, averaged over all ij-pairs with the same index separation n ≡|j −i|. Auhl et al. 36
showed that, compared with the radial distribution function, end-to-end distance and radius
of gyration, MSID better captures chain deformation at intermediate scales which does not
fully relax until the whole chain is equilibrated. Figure 1 plots ⟨R2(n)⟩/(nr2
b) (rb = 0.97
is the equilibrium bond/spring length), which is the characteristic ratio of the KG chain,
versus n for our equilibrated monodisperse systems. All curves increase monotonically at
the beginning.
For the longer chains (N ≥50), the characteristic ratio converges to a
constant value at the large n limit – i.e., C∞. The obtained C∞= 1.75 in our simulation is
in excellent agreement with previous studies (e.g., 1.74 in Kremer and Grest 17 and 1.75 in
Auhl et al. 36).
For each cell composition, three random initial conﬁgurations were independently gen-
erated and each underwent the above equilibration procedure before its production run.

6
FIG. 1: Characteristic ratio calculated from the mean square internal displacement
(MSID) for equilibrated monodisperse systems of diﬀerent chain lengths.
Productions runs were performed in an NVT ensemble with T = 1.0 using Nose-Hoover
chains for thermostating. The production run of each conﬁguration lasted for a total of
5 × 105 TUs for monodisperse N = 25 and N = 50 cases, 1 × 106 TUs for the monodisperse
N = 100 case, and 3 × 106 TUs for all other cases (any system, monodisperse or bidisperse,
containing N = 350 chains). Results reported in this study were averages over these three
trajectories from independent initial conﬁgurations unless speciﬁed otherwise. Error bars,
when provided, report the standard error between the independent runs.
III.
RESULTS AND DISCUSSION
A.
Mean Square Displacement (MSD)
We studied the dynamics of each component in the mixture using the monomer MSD
g1(t) which describes the motion of individual monomers
g1(t) ≡1
nc
nc
X
i=1

1
Nj
Ni
X
j=1
[⃗rij(t) −⃗rij(0)]2


(5)
and the MSD of the center of mass g3(t) which describes the overall motion of the center
of mass of individual chains
g3(t) ≡1
nc
nc
X
i=1
[⃗ri,c.m.(t) −⃗ri,c.m.(0)]2
(6)
where⃗
ri,c.m.(t) ≡1
Ni
Ni
X
j=1⃗
ri,j(t),
(7)
nc is the number of chains of each component, Ni is the length of the i-th chain,⃗ri,j(t)
is the position of the j-th monomer of the i-th chain, and⃗ri,c.m.(t) is the position of the
center of mass of the i-th chain37,38. An eﬃcient method for MSD calculation based on fast
Fourier transform (FFT), as detailed in Press et al. 39 and Calandrini et al. 40, was used.

7
Theoretically, the monomeric MSD of an unentangled chain described by the Rouse model
follows the following scaling behavior in diﬀerent time regimes4,38
g1(t) ∼





t1
t < τ0
t1/2
τ0 < t < τR
t1
t > τR
,
(8)
where τ0 signiﬁes the characteristic relaxation time of a single monomer and τR is the Rouse
time – the characteristic relaxation time of the whole chain (according to the Rouse model).
For entangled systems, the simple tube model gives the following scalings
g1(t) ∼

















t1
t < τ0
t1/2
τ0 < t < τe
t1/4
τe < t < τR
t1/2
τR < t < τd
t1
t > τd
(9)
and
g3(t) ∼





t1
t < τe
t1/2
τe < t < τR
t1
t > τR
(10)
where τe is the relaxation time of an entanglement strand and τd is the disentanglement
time – the longest relaxation time of an entangled chain.
The monomer MSD of our monodisperse systems is presented in ﬁg. 2. Our calculation
of g1(t) did not average over all monomers as indicated in eq. 5. To minimize chain-end
eﬀects, only the middle monomer of each chain was included. At early times, all chains
should start out with g1(t) scaling with t1. This regime is not captured in ﬁg. 2 because
our sampling frequency was not high enough to capture the dynamics at such a small time
scale. The next expected regime, for both unentangled and entangled chains, has a t1/2
scaling which is indeed observed in all chain lengths studied. Dynamics of diﬀerent chain
lengths diverge thereafter. The N = 25 and 50 cases directly enter the diﬀusive regime
(t1), which is consistent with the Rouse model prediction (eq. 8). Note that for N = 50,
complete alignment with the t1 scaling starts at t ∼O(104) which agrees with previous
studies of monodisperse polymer dynamics17. In comparison, the earlier bidisperse polymer
study by Barsky 10 only covered time scales up to t ≈4000.
Deviation from this pure
Rouse dynamics is seen in longer chains. For N = 100, we observe a clear slow down in
the t ∼O(103) to O(104) regime, but it falls short of completely dropping to a t1/4 scaling,
which reﬂects weak entanglement and an insuﬃcient separation between the entanglement
strand length and the chain length (i.e., insuﬃcient separation between τe and τR).
A
pronounced τe < t < τR regime is found in the longest chain with N = 350. A least-square
regression analysis of the MSD data from t ≈3 × 103 to 2 × 105 gives a t0.28±0.02 scaling,
which is close to, but still slightly higher than, the theoretical t1/4 prediction.
For comparison, the g1(t) proﬁle for monodisperse N = 350 semiﬂexible chains reported
in Wang and Larson 26 was also visibly steeper than the t1/4 scaling line. The increased
slope could be attributed to CR and CLF, both of which were not considered in eq. (9).
CR leads to the relaxation of the constraining tubes and the mobility of chain segments
contains contributions from both chain reptation within tubes and the tube Rouse motion41.
Meanwhile, even the longest N = 350 chains studied here are still not signiﬁcantly longer
than the entanglement threshold. Therefore, CLF is felt over substantial portions of the
chains (if not the entire chains), instead of just the chain ends (as in the case of well-
entangled chains). Theories are typically constructed for much longer chains where the
number of entanglement strands per chain Z ≡N/Ne ≫O(1) (see Ne estimated below in

8
TABLE II: Time scales extracted from the pure N = 350 melt MSD curve.
τ0
τe
τR
τd
3.20 3.43 × 103 1.66 × 105 1.74 × 106
FIG. 2: Mean square displacement of internal monomers g1(t) of monodisperse systems.
eq. (11)). Finally, we also note that slope estimation from regression is always subject to
statistical error and can also be sensitive to the range of data points used. The increase
seen in our g1(t) proﬁle slope for N = 350 is not large compared with uncertainty.
By ﬁtting diﬀerent segments of MSD data to the scaling laws with their correspond-
ing theoretical exponents (eq. (9)), we can identify the time scales for diﬀerent dynamical
regimes based on the intersections between the ﬁtted lines. To obtain τ0, we ran an ad-
ditional short 100 TU simulation with data stored at higher frequency for the N = 350
case (to obtain the g1(t) proﬁle for smaller time scales than those shown in ﬁg. 2). The
results are summarized in table II. This approach, however, can be sensitive to the speciﬁc
regression procedure and its uncertainty. From the obtained time scales , the entanglement
strand length
Ne =
τe
τ0
1/2
≈33
(11)
can be estimated, which is consistent with literature values based on MSD17.
We next shift our focus to bidisperse systems, starting with the eﬀects of a longer chain
component (NL = 350) on the mobility of the shorter chains. Figure 3a shows the center-
of-mass MSD, g3(t), of pure N = 50 chains and the same NS = 50 chains when mixed with
a longer NL = 350 component in log-log coordinates. At short time, MSD curves from
mono- and bi-disperse systems appear indistinguishable. However, the pure N = 50 case
(φS = 1) is the ﬁrst to transition from the t1/2 to t1 scaling and shows higher chain mobility
afterwards. With increasing concentration of the longer chain (lowering φS), mobility of the
N = 50 chains decreases. The diﬀerence appears small in ﬁg. 3a, but when put in linear
scales (ﬁg. 3b), it is clear that the diﬀusion rate of the N = 50 chains decreases. The same
observation, that the long-chain component impedes the motion of the shorter chains, is
also made when other shorter chains (NS = 25 and 100) are mixed with NL = 350 chains.
It also agrees with the general observation made in a number of previous studies10,14,25,42.
We further quantify chain mobility in the long-time limit by calculating its self-diﬀusion

9
FIG. 3: Mean square displacement of the center of mass g3(t) for N = 50 chains in its
pure melt and in bidisperse mixtures with NL = 350 chains as the minority and majority
component: (a) log-log coordinates and (b) linear coordinates.
coeﬃcient D using the Einstein relation
lim
t→∞g3(t) ∼6Dt
(12)
which allows the extraction of D from the slope of the MSD curve. Figure 4 shows the
diﬀusion coeﬃcient of the shorter component in bidisperse mixtures as well as that of pure
short-chain melts. As shown in ﬁgure 4a, the presence of the longer chains (NL = 350)
substantially reduces the diﬀusion rate of the shorter chains regardless of the length of the
latter and the eﬀect is stronger as the fraction of the longer component increases. The
change in DS may not appear large in the logarithmic scale used in the ﬁgure, but for
φS = 0.7 and 0.3, DS drops by ≈15% and 30%, respectively, for all three short chain length
NS levels.
Figure 4b re-plots the same set of data using NS as the independent variable. It highlights
that for the three composition levels (including the pure short-chain limit) studied, the
chain-length dependence follows the same pattern – i.e., lines for diﬀerent φS stay parallel

10
FIG. 4: Diﬀusion coeﬃcient of the short-chain component in bidisperse mixtures with
NL = 350 chains (compared with that of pure short chain), as functions of (a) short chain
mass/volume fraction φS and (b) short chain length NS
to one another.
The trend extends at least up to NS = 100 where weak entanglement
has already kicked in, as reﬂected by the steeper slope between NS = 50 and 100. This
means that, e.g., DS(NS = 50)/DS(NS = 25) stays nearly the same for diﬀerent φS levels
(note, again, the logarithmic scale in DS), at least in the range tested, suggesting that the
increasing resistance brought by the long chain can be lumped into a monomeric friction
factor that increases with the long-chain fraction but remains independent of NS – i.e.,
ζ(φL). This observation can be rationalized considering that the relaxation of the longer
species is a much slower process and, within the relaxation time of the shorter component,
the long chains can be approximated as an invariant matrix.
We turn now to the eﬀects of the shorter component on the long chains. Figure 5 shows
the center-of-mass MSD of NL = 350 chains in bidisperse mixtures with the NS = 25
species as the diluent. It is observed that the presence of the shorter component speeds
up the relaxation of the longer chains and the eﬀect increases with the short-chain fraction
φS = 1−φL. Since N = 350 ≫Ne, entanglement eﬀects are clearly shown in the g3(t) curve
of the pure N = 350 case – a t∼0.6 scaling regime is found around t ∼O(104). The exponent

11
FIG. 5: MSD of the center of mass g3(t) of NL = 350 chains in bidisperse mixtures with
NS = 25 chains (both as the minority and as the majority component). MSD of pure
N = 350 chains is also included for comparison.
is slightly higher than the theoretical prediction of 1/2 in the τe < t < τR regime (eq. (10)).
Again, we note that the N = 350 semiﬂexible chains reported in Wang and Larson 26
also showed steeper g3(t) proﬁle than the theoretical t1/2 prediction. The discrepancy, as
discussed above, may still be attributed to CLF and CR which are not considered in the
theory. Transition to the t1 diﬀusive regime occurs at t ≈2 × 105 ∼τR. With increasing
fraction of the short chains, the exponent (slope in log-log coordinates) of the same time
range t ∼O(104), greatly increases, reaching 0.82 at φL = 0.3. This intermediate regime
becomes less diﬀerentiable from the long-time diﬀusive limit, suggesting a weakening of
entanglement eﬀects by short chain addition.
Eﬀects of varying the short-chain length (NS = 25, 50, and 100) on the mobility of the
longer chain (NL = 350) are shown in ﬁg. 6a (long-chain majority with φL = 0.7) and
ﬁg. 7a (long-chain minority with φL = 0.3). Panel (b) of both ﬁgures replot the data in
linear coordinates to highlight the changes in diﬀusion rate. At short time, dynamics of the
N = 350 chains stays close to its pure melt limit, but after t ∼O(103) (∼τe), it becomes
clear that mixing with shorter chains increases the mobility of the longer chains and the
eﬀect is stronger as NS decreases. Around t ∼O(104) – i.e., the original t1/2 scaling regime
in pure entangled melts – the slope is again raised by the addition of the short chains,
which is more clearly observed when the long chains become the minority component (ﬁg.
7a). The onset of this intermediate regime of slower dynamics, which marks τe, is reduced.
Overall, the introduction of short chains speeds up the dynamics of the entangled chain
species and lessens the extent of entanglement.
Increasing slope in the τe < t < τR segment, with decreasing matrix chain length NS,
was also previously reported by Wang and Larson 26 in both the g1(t) and g3(t) proﬁles of
their long probe chain. For example, in their binary mixtures of NL = 350 and NS = 25
(both semiﬂexible) chains with φL = 0.15, the slope of g3(t) reached 0.84, whereas their
NS = 160 (and NL = 350) case had a slope of 0.58. The latter is close to our monodisperse
N = 350 case because NS = 160 is already substantially entangled (especially considering
their higher chain rigidity which gives lower Ne than our ﬂexible chains). With more short
chains in the surrounding (higher φS) or faster relaxation of those chains (lower NS), CR is
stronger, which leads to faster tube relaxation and, eventually, the higher mobility in the
longer entangled chains.
The diﬀusion coeﬃcient of the NL = 350 chains DL, is again calculated from the MSD
data at the long-time limit. The result is plotted in ﬁg. 8. DL increases with the short-chain

12
FIG. 6: MSD of the center of mass g3(t) of NL = 350 chains in bidisperse mixtures as the
majority component (φL = 0.7), with NS = 25, 50, and 100 chains as the minority
component: (a) log-log coordinates; (b) linear coordinates. The MSD of pure N = 350
chains is also included for comparison.
fraction φS = 1 −φL and the eﬀect is stronger for as NS decreases. With 30% short chains
in the mixture (i.e., NL = 350 remains the majority), the speed-up is 87%, 52% and 34%
for NS = 25, 50, and 100 respectively, while when short chains reach 70% (i.e., NL = 350
becomes the minority), the speed-up reaches 455%, 320%, and 151% for the same three NS
levels.
Speed up of long chain dynamics upon introducing the short chain component again
agrees with various previous simulation studies10,15,25,26,42. The results above have also
been conﬁrmed experimentally. Wang et al. 43 studied the eﬀects of short chains on the
dynamics of long chains and vice versa using a binary mixture of 1,4-polybutadiene at
diﬀerent weight concentrations of the long chains. The diﬀusion coeﬃcients of the diﬀerent
chains were measured using pulsed-gradient NMR spin echo measurements. Their results
showed that the dynamics of the longer chains were sped up by the shorter chains and the
eﬀects were stronger with decreasing weight fraction of the longer chains.

13
FIG. 7: MSD of the center of mass g3(t) of NL = 350 chains in bidisperse mixtures as the
minority component (φL = 0.3), with NS = 25, 50, and 100 chains as the majority
component: (a) log-log coordinates; (b) linear coordinates. The MSD of pure N = 350
chains is also included for comparison.
B.
Rouse Mode Analysis (RMA)
MSD analysis above suggests that: (1) dynamics of the short-chain species is impeded by
the long chains but still follows similar patterns as the corresponding pure short-chain melt
and (2) dynamics of the long-chain species is accelerated by the short chains and features of
entanglement become weakened. Here, we apply Rouse mode analysis to directly examine
the extent of entanglement eﬀects in diﬀerent species. We start with a quick review of the
Rouse model. It treats the probe chain as a Gaussian chain and considers all its surrounding
chains to form a continuous viscous medium – i.e., a mean-ﬁeld approach. Dynamics of each
bead on the probe chain is described by the inertia-less Langevin equation8. For example,
the equation of motion for the i-th bead is written as:
ζ d⃗ri
dt = Hs [(⃗ri+1 −⃗ri) −(⃗ri −⃗ri−1)] +⃗f r
i
(13)

14
FIG. 8: Diﬀusion coeﬃcient of the long chain (NL = 350) in bidisperse mixtures with
shorter chains of diﬀerent lengths NS.
where ζ is the monomeric friction coeﬃcient, Hs is the spring constant,⃗ri is the position of
the i-th bead, and⃗f r
i is the random force exerted on the i-th bead satisfying
D⃗
f r
i (t)⃗f r
j(t′)
E
= 2ζkBTδijδ(t −t′)⃗⃗δ
(14)
where δ(t) is the Dirac delta function, δij is the Kronecker delta, and⃗⃗δ is the identity
tensor. Equation (13) shows that position coordinates of neighboring beads are coupled in
their dynamics through spring forces. The RMA projects the original bead coordinates⃗ri
to a set of mutually orthogonal coordinates known as Rouse modes or normal coordinates⃗
Xp (p = 0, 1, ..., N −1). We adopt the original form of projection by Rouse2⃗
Xp ≡
r
2
N
N
X
n=1⃗
ri(t) cos
(i −1/2)pπ
N

(p = 0, 1, 2, ...N −1)
(15)
which is widely used in the literature11,13,44–46. The p = 0 mode describes the motion of
the center of mass of the chain and the other modes (1 ≤p ≤N −1) describe the internal
relaxations of sub-chains, or ”blobs”, of the size of N/p beads. Each of the transformed
coordinate or Rouse mode⃗Xp follows Langevin dynamics with its own friction coeﬃcient
and random force. Importantly, relaxation of diﬀerent modes is mutually independent. The
autocorrelation function (ACF) of each p > 1 mode decays exponentially
D⃗
Xp(t)⃗Xp(0)
E
=
D⃗
X2
p
E
exp

−t
τp

(16)
with its own relaxation time τp given by
τ −1
p
= 12kBT
ζb2
sin2  pπ
2N

(17)
where b2 is the mean-square bond (spring) length. For leading modes with p ≲N/5, which
describes the motions of larger segments with N/p ≳5 beads, eq. (17) can be approximated
by2
τp =
ζb2
3π2kBT
N
p
2
.
(18)

15
Rouse model is commonly used to describe the dynamics of unentangled polymer melts.
With increasing chain length, topological constraints set in and relaxation dynamics
changes. For entangled chains, we may still project the coordinates to⃗Xp using eq. (15)
but the ACFs no longer follow simple exponential decay. A stretched exponential is often
used instead11–13,47,48
D⃗
Xp(t)⃗Xp(0)
E
=
D⃗
X2
p
E
exp
"
−
 t
τ ∗p
βp#
(19)
where τ ∗
p and βp are the time scale and exponent (stretching parameter) for the p-th mode.
The relaxation time of a stretched exponential can be deﬁned as
τp ≡
Z ∞
0
exp
"
−
 t
τ ∗p
βp#
dt =
τ ∗
p
βp

Γ
 1
βp

(20)
where Γ(x) is the gamma function. Note that at the simple exponential limit, i.e., βp →1,
the two time scales are the same τp = τ ∗
p .
We start with the relaxation of NS = 25 chains in its pure melt (φS = 1.0) and in mixtures
with NL = 350 chains. Figure 9 shows the time ACF of the p = 1 mode at diﬀerent mass
fractions. In all cases, the logarithm of the ACF follows a straight line for nearly the whole
time range – i.e., the simple exponential decay as given in eq. (16) accurately describes
the relaxation dynamics of short chains. Relaxation dynamics of unentangled monodisperse
melts of KG chains is known to be well approximated by the Rouse model despite its many
simpliﬁcations17. However, we ﬁnd that even in mixtures with a long-chain species well
beyond the entanglement threshold, the nature of the short-chain dynamics is not changed
at least for φS down to 30%. (At very low φS, we do expect the dynamic pattern to diﬀer
– indeed, diﬀusion of small molecules, at extremely low concentration, in a matrix of long-
chain polymers is known to display jerky “hop”-like movements49.) The presence of longer
chains seemingly do not have any eﬀect other than to increase the relaxation time of the
shorter chains – note in ﬁg. 9 that the pure NS = 25 melt has the steepest slope and the
relaxation slows down with increasing long chain fraction (φS decreases). This is consistent
with the earlier discussion that having longer chains in the background medium increases
the eﬀective friction coeﬃcient of the short chains. The results for NS = 50 are similar and
thus not shown here.
Fitting the ACF to the single exponential of eq. (16) provides the relaxation time, which
is plotted against 1/p2 in Figures 10 and 11 for NS = 25 and 50 chains respectively. From
eq. (18), for the Rouse model, τp versus 1/p2 should give a straight line, at least for small
p, whose slope equals the longest relaxation time τ1. For NS = 25 (ﬁg. 10), this Rouse
behavior is clearly demonstrated, whereas some small deviations are observed in NS = 50
case (ﬁg. 11). Introducing a longer NL = 350 species does not change the nature of the
dynamics, but the relaxation time of the shorter chains increases with increasing long-chain
content. In both ﬁgures, the highest p mode available is limited by the sampling frequency
– the frequency at which coordinates were stored – used in our simulation.
Slowdown of short-chain dynamics in the presence of longer chains in its surroundings
is intuitively predictable and well established in the literature10,25,26,42. Nevertheless, our
ﬁnding, from results here as well as back in ﬁg. 4b, that the reduced mobility can be fully
described by an increased friction factor, which is only a function of composition φL and does
not vary with NS, has never been reported before to our best knowledge. Kopf, D¨unweg, and
Paul 11 found that when two unentangled isotope chain species with identical chain length
but diﬀerent monomeric mass are mixed, they retain the same Rouse dynamics as their
pure melts but with diﬀerent eﬀective monomeric friction factors – the light and heavy
components see their friction factor to increase and decrease, respectively. The eﬀective
friction factor depends on both the volume fraction of heavy chains and the mass ratio
between the components. However, at least for 10 ≤N ≤30 investigated in that study, it
does not depend on the chain length N. What we ﬁnd here is that, for a short unentangled
chain species, mixing with a longer species, which is well within the entangled regime, does

16
FIG. 9: Relaxation of the p = 1 Rouse mode of NS = 25 chains in its pure melt and in
bidisperse mixtures with NL = 350 chains. Lines represent linear regression corresponding
to the simple exponential relaxation of eq. (16).
FIG. 10: Single-exponential relaxation time τp of NS = 25 chains in its pure melt
(φS = 1.0) and in bidisperse mixtures with NL = 350 chains (p = 1 to p = 3).
not change its own dynamical patterns, even when, e.g., in the case of NS = 50, its own
length already exceeds Ne.
Departure from Rouse dynamics is observed as chain length gets longer and entanglement
eﬀects set in. Rouse mode projection (eq. (15)) may still be applied to longer chains, but
relaxation of each mode is no longer independent. As a result, its ACF does not follow
the simple exponential decay as given in eq. (16). Figure 12 shows stretched exponential
(eq. (19)) ﬁts to the ACFs of leading Rouse modes of the monodisperse N = 350 system as
well as its mixture with short NS = 25 chains as the diluent. In both cases, it appears that
the p = 1 mode may still be reasonably approximated by a simple exponential (i.e., close
to straight lines in the ﬁgure). However, at p = 3, curvature in the proﬁle is too strong
to be ignored and a stretched exponential is required. The same behavior is observed in
higher modes such as p = 5 and 7 (not shown here). Coupling between diﬀerent modes is
attributed to the topological constraints imposed by entanglements. Indeed, using a simple

17
FIG. 11: Single-exponential relaxation time τp of NS = 50 chains in its pure melt
(φS = 1.0) and in bidisperse mixtures with NL = 350 chains (p = 1 to p = 3).
FIG. 12: Relaxation of the leading Rouse modes of N = 350 chains in its pure melt (ﬁlled
symbols) and as the minority component in a bidisperse mixture with NS = 25 (empty
symbols; φL = 0.3). Lines represent stretched exponential ﬁts (eq. (19)).
lattice model, Shaﬀer13 showed that allowing chains to cross one another would recover the
Rouse dynamics in otherwise entangled chains. For bidisperse mixtures, we observe that
introducing short NS = 25 chains as a diluent, at least for φS up to 70% shown in ﬁg. 12,
does not eliminate this non-Rouse behavior, even though the relaxation dynamics of the
NL = 350 chains is signiﬁcantly accelerated (compared with its pure melt).
Curvature in the ln(⟨⃗Xp(t)⃗Xp(0)⟩/⟨⃗X2
p⟩) vs t plot is measured by the stretching parameter
βp, which can thus be viewed as an indicator of non-Rouse behaviors (βp = 1 in the purely
Rouse limit). Figure 13a shows βp as a function of N/p (which measures the number of
beads in each segment or sub-chain described by the p-th mode) for monodisperse melts of
diﬀerent chain lengths. At the high-p (small N/p) end, all curves approximately overlap
regardless of the chain length (entangled or not), indicating that relaxation of small segments
is independent of the overall chain length. This terminal βp value of 0.5 ∼0.6 is signiﬁcantly

18
lower than 1 – departure of small-scale segmental relaxation from the Rouse model is obvious
even for the shortest chains. This is likely due to the diﬀerences between the KG chain used
in our simulation and the Gaussian chain in the Rouse model. In particular, the latter
does not consider the excluded-volume eﬀect between beads, which is more important in
dynamics at small scales. Indeed, strong departure of βp from 1 at small scales was noted
in several earlier studies12,15,19. At N/p ≈3, βp starts to rise steeply, reaching nearly 0.8 at
N/p ≈5 (segment size of 5 beads), after which curves of diﬀerent N separate. For N = 25
(where N/p = 5 corresponds to the p = 5 mode), βp continues to increase with lowering p,
ending well above 0.9 for the p = 1 mode. For N = 50, βp plateaus around 0.8 until p = 3
mode after which it again quickly rises above 0.9.
Entanglement eﬀects are most clearly seen in the N = 350 case where, after the plateau
at 5 ≲N/p ≲10, βp quickly declines and reaches its minimum at N/p ∼70. This minimum
βp is around 0.6. Strong departure from the Rouse model at this length scale is attributed
to the topological constraints between entangled chains: each chain is now constrained
to its surrounding tube (the chain follows reptation motion) and can no longer meander
freely in the three-dimensional space. The size of segments N/p strongly aﬀected by this
eﬀect also coincides with the entanglement strand size Ne of the KG model (30 ∼80).
Interestingly, leading modes (p = 4 to 1) again show a rapid surge of βp – relaxation of
largest segments returns to the Rouse-like single exponential behavior, which is consistent
with the observation in ﬁg. 12 that a simple exponential adequately captures the relaxation
behavior of the p = 1 mode. One can rationalize this considering that at length scales
≫Ne, the conformation of the constraining tube itself (or, more accurately, the primitive
path) undergoes multiple turns. In addition, over the time scale of τd (the longest relaxation
time of entangled chains), surrounding chains all have suﬃcient time to relax, which causes
signiﬁcant CR, and the tube (primitive path) conformation changes substantially through
its own Rouse motion41. Chain motion at the largest scales is thus again described by a
three-dimensional random walk. The N = 100 case is similar to N = 50 but a small dip in
βp is found near N/p ≈30 as a sign of weak entanglement.
Dependence of relaxation time τp, as calculated from eq. (20), on the segment size N/p is
shown in ﬁg. 13b (again for monodisperse melts). Rouse model predicts (eq. (18)) τp/(N/p)2
to be a constant for N/p ≳5 which is indeed observed in the N = 25 and 50 cases in our
simulation. Departure from the plateau is found at smaller scales (N/p ≲5), where the
relaxation times of all chain lengths again overlap. Entanglement causes a sudden slowdown
in the dynamics, which shows as a surge in τp/(N/p)2 starting at N/p ∼O(10). At the
long-segment (small-p) limit, another, much higher, plateau is reached. This conforms with
the tube model prediction4 of
τp ∼
 N
Ne
 N
p
2
.
(21)
A raised right-end plateau is also discernible in the N = 100 case, although the level of
elevation (from the Rouse plateau) is small, indicating that N = 100 is close to the onset
of entanglement.
For monodisperse melts, stretched exponential analysis of Rouse modes has been per-
formed in a number of previous studies using various models. Shaﬀer 13’s BFM, despite
its many diﬀerences in model construction with the KG model used in our study, showed
strikingly similar results. Their βp proﬁle started with a plateau value between 0.7 and
0.8, which agrees with our plateau at 5 ≲N/p ≲10. They did not report a lower βp level
for smallest N/p but such discrepancy at smallest scales is expected given the diﬀerences
between the models. For entangled chains, they also showed a deep dip at higher N/p,
occurring also at N/p ≈60 ∼70 for their longest chains (N = 300 and 500). For reference,
their model reported Ne ≈32 based on the self-diﬀusion coeﬃcient of chains – i.e., their
dip also occurred at N/p ≈2Ne, which was quantitatively consistent with our observation.
Their N = 160 chains, similar to our N = 100 case, showed a shallower dip occurring at
smaller N/p, which is a sign of weak entanglement expected in the transitional regime. Their
τp/(N/p)2 proﬁles also showed a raised plateau at the high-N/p end for entangled chains.

19
FIG. 13: Rouse mode analysis with stretched exponential ﬁtting – stretching parameter βp
((a),(c), and (e)) and relaxation time τp (scaled by (N/p)2; (b),(d), and (f)) – of
monodisperse melts of varying chain length ((a) and (b)) and the NL = 350 component in
bidisperse mixtures with the longer chains as the majority (φL = 0.7; (c) and (d)) and
minority (φL = 0.3; (e) and (f)) component.
Interestingly, both hallmarks of entanglement (dip in βp and raised plateau in τp/(N/p)2)
disappeared if chains were allowed to cross. More recent studies based on the KG model, for
N = 500 to 2000, also showed an “entanglement dip” at N/p ≈70 ∼100 with βp dropping
down to ∼0.512,48,50. On the other hand, the diamond lattice model by Lin, Mattice, and
Von Meerwall 15 showed βp to increase monotonically from ∼0.4 to a plateau of ∼0.7 at
the high-N/p end without the “entanglement dip”. Similarly, Padding and Briels 19 per-
formed MD using a coarse-grained polyethylene model and also only reported a plateau at

20
the high-N/p end for highly entangled chains. Note that unlike the KG model, in which the
LJ potential of tightly-bonded beads is suﬃcient to prevent chain crossing, non-crossability
had to be explicitly enforced in the above two models. For Padding and Briels 19, the coarse-
grained non-bonded interactions were too soft to prevent chain crossing and an additional
bond-crossing potential was imposed (the so-called TWENTANGLEMENT algorithm47).
Thus, whether or not an “entanglement dip” would occur seems to depend on the speciﬁc
treatment of non-crossability.
In binary mixtures with shorter chains where the NL = 350 species remains the majority
component (ﬁgs. 13c and 13d), the same hallmarks of entanglement – i.e., dip in βp at
O(10) ≲N/p ≲O(102) and raised plateau in τp/(N/p)2 at N/p ≳O(102) – are preserved.
Introduction of the short chain diluent lessens the extent of entanglement, as reﬂected by
the shallowing of the βp dip and reduction in the raised τp/(N/P)2 plateau magnitude. At
its core, this is still a CR eﬀect – faster relaxation of the shorter chains in its surroundings
emancipates the long chain from topological constraints earlier. This can be described as
faster tube Rouse motion41, but as the diluent chains get shorter, tube dilation8 also plays
a role. Indeed, Baig et al. 25 showed that tube dilation only occurs when NS < Ne, whereas
for larger NS, the diluent accelerates tube relaxation without changing its diameter.
The eﬀect strengthens as the diluent chain length decreases. Increasing the short-chain
mass fraction to 70% (ﬁgs. 13e and 13f) signiﬁcantly alleviates entanglement and, with
NS = 25 as the diluent, dynamics of NL = 350 chains is pushed to the marginally entangled
limit (similar to the pure N = 100 case in ﬁgs. 13a and 13b). Increasing CR with increasing
φS and with decreasing NS are both expected and well established15,25,26.
C.
Stress relaxation
Previous sections focused on the dynamics of individual chains – in the case of bidisperse
mixtures, discussion of MSD and RMA shows how the relaxation of one chain type is
aﬀected by the dynamics of the other. We turn now to the stress relaxation dynamics of
the melt in its entirety. Stress relaxation modulus G(t) is deﬁned as the ratio of the time-
dependent shear stress following a small step strain to the strain magnitude. G(t) contains
the full specrum of information about the material linear viscoelasticity and is sensitive
to the MWD of the polydisperse mixture. A bidisperse mixture oﬀers a simple model for
studying the eﬀects of chain-length disparity on G(t), which will further contribute to the
general understanding of MWD eﬀects on polymer rheology.
In equilibrium molecular dynamics, the Green-Kubo relation relates G(t) to the ACF of
shear stress ﬂuctuations:
G(t) =
V
kBT ⟨σxy(t0)σxy(t0 + t)⟩
(22)
where V is the volume of the system, T is the temperature, and σxy is the instantaneous
shear stress. The stress relaxation modulus is rather diﬃcult to calculate due to intense
stress ﬂuctuations that are intrinsic to small-scale systems, which has a particularly strong
impact on the stress ACF at the terminal (long-time) regime. In isotropic ﬂuids, stress
ACFs in multiple directions can be averaged in an attempt to reduce ﬂuctuations51. We
use the particular form of
G(t) =
V
5kBT [⟨σxy(t)σxy(0)⟩+ ⟨σyz(t)σyz(0)⟩
+⟨σzx(t)σzx(0)⟩] +
V
30kBT [⟨Nxy(t)Nxy(0)⟩
+⟨Nxz(t)Nxz(0)⟩+ ⟨Nyz(t)Nyz(0)⟩]
(23)
where
Nαβ = σαα −σββ.
(24)

21
The same expression was also used in Ram´ırez et al. 52. The number of diﬀerent components
for averaging is nevertheless still too small to signiﬁcantly reduce the noise in the signal33.
We further used the multi-tau correlator method developed by Ram´ırez et al. 52 which uses a
hierarchical multi-level data structure to store and ﬁlter time series and calculate correlation
functions on the ﬂy. In its data structure, level 0 stores the most recent p data points in the
time series. At level 1, the ﬁrst entry stores the average value of the most recent m (m < p)
points, the second entry stores the average of the next m points, and so on. Similarly, each
entry at level l is the average of m entries at level l −1. As such, stored data represent local
averages of the original time series and the averaging window size (ml for level l) increases
with the level, so does the time lag it covers (the range of previous time where information
is retained at the current level). For the smallest time lags (up to p −1 sampling intervals),
the unﬁltered time series is used, whereas for increasing time lag (higher levels), averages
over larger window sizes are used. In this study, we use the same default parameters p = 16
and m = 2 as recommended in Ram´ırez et al. 52.
Relaxation modulus is calculated for both monodisperse and bidisperse samples in our
simulations. In ﬁg. 14, G(t) is scaled by a factor of t1/2, as the Rouse model predicts a
t−1/2 scaling in stress relaxation:
GRouse(t) =
√π
2
√
2νchainkBT
 t
τR
−1
2
(t ≲τR)
(25)
where νchain is the number density of chains, related to the bead number density νbead by
νchain = νbead
N
.
(26)
Since τR scales with N 2, for given monomer species and bead density, G(t) magnitude does
not depend on the chain length – chain length only aﬀects τR, i.e., when terminal relaxation
(departure from eq. (25)) kicks in. Using νbead = 0.85 and τR = 1.66 × 105 based on the
MSD of the pure N = 350 case from our simulation (table II), the Rouse prediction of
t1/2GRouse(t) = 0.62 (in LJ reduced units with G nondimensionalized by kBT) is shown as
a ﬂat dashed line in ﬁg. 14.
It is observed that pure melts of the shorter (N = 25 and 50) chains completely relax
before a pronounced Rouse plateau can be formed. For the pure N = 350 melt, a Rouse
plateau is clearly identiﬁed from t ∼O(10) up to t ≈2000. For comparison, τe = 3428
according to table II. Departure from the Rouse plateau at the small t limit is also consistent
with the earlier conclusion from RMA that the Rouse model does not accurately capture the
dynamics at small scales. Entanglement manifests as a strong spike above the Rouse plateau
at longer time. For N = 100, entanglement is not strong enough to cause substantially
raised stress than the pure rouse level. For mixtures between NL = 350 chains with a shorter
component, if the long chains remain the majority (ﬁg. 14a), a spike is still clearly observable
for diﬀerent diluent chain length (down to NS = 25). If the long chains become the minority
(ﬁg. 14b), t1/2G(t) no longer rises above the Rouse plateau. However, compared with the
short-chain cases, in bidisperse mixtures, a second lower (∼0.2) plateau regime is found,
indicating that even the weak entanglement present in those mixtures can appreciably hinder
relaxation at longer time scales.
In practice, contributions of diﬀerent components of a polydisperse mixture are usually
accounted for through mixing rules that relate the MWD of the polydisperse mixture to its
G(t). A generalized form of the mixing rule is given as53–55
G(t) = G0
N
Z ∞
log Ne
F 1/β(t, N)w(N)d(log N)
β
(27)
where G0
N is the plateau modulus and F(t, N) is a kernel function accounting for the
contribution from chains of length N. The w(M) function is given by
w(N) ≡dW(N)
dlogN
(28)

22
FIG. 14: Stress relaxation modulus G(t) (scaled by t1/2) of pure polymer melts of diﬀerent
chain length N (lines) and bidisperse melts with NL = 350 and various NS (symbols): (a)
φL = 0.7; (b) φL = 0.3. Each proﬁle is averaged over three independent conﬁgurations.
Horizontal dashed line shows the Rouse model prediction.
where W(N) is the cumulative weight fraction of chains with the degree of polymerization
lower than N, and β is a parameter describing the mixing behavior. Diﬀerent β values have
been used in the literature. A β value of 1 gives linear combination derived from the simple
tube model. The double reptation model by des Cloizeaux9 leads to a β value of 2. Van
Ruymbeke et al. 7 adjusted the value to 2.25 to obtain better ﬁts for the linear viscoelastic
properties evaluated in their study. Higher β values have also been proposed in the litera-
ture to describe higher order entanglements7,56,57. Several kernel functions have also been
reported. The simplest choice is a step function58 which assumes steep transition between
strained and relaxed conformations. Tsenoglou 59 described the relaxation using a more re-
alistic single exponential function which gives better qualitative prediction. More accurate
quantitative description is possible with more sophisticated forms such as the relaxation
function of Doi and Edwards 4, along with its derived form that accounts for the eﬀects of
contour length ﬂuctuations4, and the time-dependent diﬀusion model of Des Cloizeaux 60.

23
In a bidisperse mixture,
w(N) = φSδ(log N −log NS) + φLδ(log N −log NL).
(29)
Using the property
Z a+ϵ
a−ϵ
f(x)δ(x −a)dx = f(a)
(ϵ > 0)
(30)
of the Dirac delta function, eq. (27) becomes
GS+L(t) = G0
N

φSF 1/β
S
(t) + φLF 1/β
L
(t)
β
(31)
where
FS(t) ≡F(t, NS)
(32)
and
FL(t) ≡F(t, NL)
(33)
are the kernel functions of the short- and long-chain species, respectively.
Our focus here is not on the analytical theory of the relaxation of individual chain species
itself, but on predicting mixture rheology based on the relaxation behaviors of individual
components. Therefore, we circumvent the analytical expression of the kernel function and
extract it directly from MD simulation of corresponding monodisperse melts. Note that at
the φS →1 limit, eq. (31) becomes
GS = G0
NFS(t)
(34)
and at the φL →1 limit
GL = G0
NFL(t).
(35)
Combining eqs. (34) and (35) with eq. (31) leads to
GS+L =

φSG1/β
S
(t) + φLG1/β
L
(t)
β
(36)
where GS(t) and GL(t) are obtained from the corresponding monodisperse simulation re-
sults.
Predictions from eq. (36) are shown in ﬁg. 15 in comparison with direct MD results
of bidisperse mixtures. Since the mixing rule of eq. (27) is only applicable to entangled
melts, binary mixtures between NS = 100 and NL = 350 are selected here. Corresponding
monodisperse MD results are also displayed. At early times, a regime dominated by Rouse
relaxation, all the curves overlap as expected. Per discussion above, G(t) from the Rouse
model is independent of chain length at t < τR. At longer times, dynamics of diﬀerent cases
separate with the pure N = 100 case being the ﬁrst to decay and N = 350 being the last.
Relaxation dynamics of bidisperse mixtures is sandwiched between the two monodisperse
limits.
Comparing the mixing rule results with MD of bidisperse cases, β = 2 gives strikingly
accurate prediction at φL = 0.7 as shown in ﬁg. 15a, showing that the double reptation
model predicts the relaxation of the system reasonably well. Note that for t up to at least
O(104), error bars in the MD data are smaller than the symbol size and thus the comparison
is statistically signiﬁcant. For φL = 0.3, β = 1 seems to be more accurate for t ≲2 × 104
shown in the inset of ﬁg. 15b, but as we examine t > 2 × 104, we spot a kink in the MD
proﬁle, which brings the curve closer to the β = 2 line right before terminal relaxation.
Admittedly, ﬂuctuations (and statistical uncertainty) also grow in that regime as we move

24
FIG. 15: Test of the mixing rule (eq. (27)) in bidisperse mixtures of NS = 100 and
NL = 350 at (a) φL = 0.7 and (b) φL = 0.3. Insets show enlarged views of the comparison
between the mixing rule and MD before terminal relaxation in a linear time scale. Error
bars are shown for bidisperse MD cases only, which are no larger than the symbol size
except in the terminal-relaxation (large-t) regime. Uncertainties in pure-melt MD cases
are similar.
closer to terminal relaxation, making the observation less statistically conclusive than the
earlier agreement with β = 1 at smaller t. We have also tested β = 2.25 which gave worse
results and is thus not shown here.
At this point, we are not ready to interpret these
observations, including (i) the concentration-dependence of the β value and (ii) possible
switch from β = 1 to β = 2 at later time in the φL = 0.3 case. Deﬁnite answers will require
expansive simulations including multiple concentration levels and a wider range of chain
lengths.

25
IV.
CONCLUSIONS
We have studied the chain dynamics and stress relaxation of bidisperse polymer melts
using MD simulation. For each bidisperse system, we mixed a long NL = 350 chain com-
ponent, whose monodisperse melt is entangled, with a short-chain diluent (which is either
unentangled – i.e., NS = 25 and 50, or marginally entangled NS = 100). Two diﬀerent
composition levels, one with the long chains as the majority component (φL = 0.7) and the
other as the minority (φL = 0.3) component, were studied.
Compared with a pure short-chain melt, mixing with longer chains signiﬁcantly reduces
the mobility of short chains. However, dynamics of a short, unentangled, chain species
remains well-described by the Rouse model, despite the presence of the longer, entangled,
chain species in the mixture. At least for φS down to 30% studied, dynamics of a short
chain in a slow-moving matrix containing entangled long chains shows the same qualitative
pattern as its relaxation in a pure monodisperse melt. Slow-down in the dynamics can be
well captured by a higher eﬀective monomeric friction coeﬃcient.
Likewise, adding a short-chain diluent can signiﬁcantly accelerate the motion of the longer,
entangled, chain species. The eﬀect is stronger as the short-chain mass fraction increases
and as its chain length decreases. Unlike the previous case, however, this speed-up eﬀect
cannot be fully described by a quantitatively lower friction coeﬃcient, which is instead
accompanied by an overall lessening of the extent of entanglement.
Rouse mode analysis revealed that for short, unentangled, chains, relaxation of Rouse
modes displays simple exponential decay, except the highest modes corresponding to dy-
namics at smallest scales. Mixing with longer chains does not change this qualitative obser-
vation. Meanwhile, for longer, entangled, chains, strong departure from simple-exponential
relaxation is seen at intermediate length scales of O(Ne). Relaxation times of intermediate
and large scales also become signiﬁcantly elevated compared with the Rouse model. Both
these characteristics of entanglement become weakened with the introduction of short-chain
diluents.
Despite the success of the Rouse model in describing the dynamics of short chains (in
both monodisperse melts and bidisperse mixtures with longer chains), stress relaxation of
monodisperse short chains does not strictly follow the Rouse scaling. For monodisperse
entangled chains, a well-deﬁned Rouse scaling regime is observed, followed by a positive
deviation from the Rouse model at longer times (in the entanglement regime). Bidisperse
mixtures display similar positive deviation when the longer species is the majority. When
it becomes the minority, the relaxation modulus no longer surpasses the Rouse scaling.
Entanglement is instead reﬂected as an elongated (compared with a pure short-chain melt)
tail of residue modulus.
Mixing rules for predicting a mixture’s relaxation modulus from that of monodisperse
melts of its constituent components were tested.
The double reptation model provides
reasonably accurate prediction when the longer chains are the majority. However, when
longer chains are the minority, the simple tube model can be more accurate in certain
regimes.
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
The authors acknowledge the ﬁnancial support from the Natural Sciences and Engineering
Research Council of Canada (NSERC) Discovery Grants program (No. RGPIN-2014-04903
and No. RGPIN-2020-06774) and the allocation of computing resources awarded by Com-
pute/Calcul Canada. S.Z. thanks the Canada Research Chairs (CRC) program (No. 950-
229035). This work is made possible by the facilities of the Shared Hierarchical Academic
Research Computing Network (SHARCNET: www.sharcnet.ca).

26
DEDICATION
This paper is dedicated to Robert Byron Bird (1924–2020) whose extraordinary contri-
butions to the research and education in the dynamics and rheology of polymers, kinetic
theory of ﬂuids, and transport phenomena were matched by very few. His love of cultures,
sense of humor, and passion for life continue to inspire many.
DATA AVAILABILITY
The data that support the ﬁndings of this study are available from the corresponding
author upon reasonable request.
1J. M. Dealy, D. J. Read, and R. G. Larson, Structure and rheology of molten polymers: from structure
to ﬂow behavior and back again (Carl Hanser Verlag GmbH Co KG, 2018).
2P. E. Rouse Jr, “A theory of the linear viscoelastic properties of dilute solutions of coiling polymers,” The
Journal of Chemical Physics 21, 1272–1280 (1953).
3R. B. Bird, C. F. Curtis, R. C. Armstrong, and O. Hassager, Dynamics of polymeric liquids, 2nd ed.,
Vol. 2 (Wiley, New York, 1987).
4M. Doi and S. F. Edwards, The theory of polymer dynamics, Vol. 73 (oxford university press, 1988).
5S. F. Edwards, “Statistical mechanics with topological constraints: I,” Proceedings of the Physical Society
(1958-1967) 91, 513 (1967).
6P.-G. de Gennes, “Reptation of a polymer chain in the presence of ﬁxed obstacles,” The journal of chemical
physics 55, 572–579 (1971).
7E. Van Ruymbeke, R. Keunings, V. St´ephenne, A. Hagenaars, and C. Bailly, “Evaluation of reptation
models for predicting the linear viscoelastic properties of entangled linear polymers,” Macromolecules 35,
2689–2699 (2002).
8M. Doi, W. Graessley, E. Helfand, and D. Pearson, “Dynamics of polymers in polydisperse melts,” Macro-
molecules 20, 1900–1906 (1987).
9J. Des Cloizeaux, “Relaxation of entangled and partially entangled polymers in melts: time-dependent
reptation,” Macromolecules 25, 835–841 (1992).
10S. Barsky, “Molecular dynamics study of diﬀusion in bidisperse polymer melts,” The Journal of Chemical
Physics 112, 3450–3456 (2000).
11A. Kopf, B. D¨unweg, and W. Paul, “Dynamics of polymer ”isotope” mixtures: Molecular dynamics
simulation and Rouse model analysis,” Journal of Chemical Physics 107, 6945–6955 (1997).
12J. T. Kalathi, S. K. Kumar, M. Rubinstein, and G. S. Grest, “Rouse mode analysis of chain relaxation
in homopolymer melts,” Macromolecules 47, 6925–6931 (2014).
13J. S. Shaﬀer, “Eﬀects of chain topology on polymer dynamics: Conﬁgurational relaxation in polymer
melts,” The Journal of chemical physics 103, 761–772 (1995).
14J. Baschnagel, W. Paul, V. Tries, and K. Binder, “Statics and dynamics of bidisperse polymer melts: A
monte carlo study of the bond-ﬂuctuation model,” Macromolecules 31, 3856–3867 (1998).
15H. Lin, W. L. Mattice, and E. D. Von Meerwall, “Chain dynamics of bidisperse polyethylene melts: A
Monte Carlo study on a high-coordination lattice,” Macromolecules 40, 959–966 (2007).
16M. Rubinstein, R. H. Colby, et al., Polymer physics, Vol. 23 (Oxford university press New York, 2003).
17K. Kremer and G. S. Grest, “Dynamics of entangled linear polymer melts: A molecular-dynamics simu-
lation,” The Journal of Chemical Physics 92, 5057–5086 (1990).
18M. Kr¨oger, W. Loose, and S. Hess, “Rheology and structural changes of polymer melts via nonequilibrium
molecular dynamics,” Journal of rheology 37, 1057–1079 (1993).
19J. Padding and W. J. Briels, “Time and length scales of polymer melts studied by coarse-grained molecular
dynamics simulations,” The Journal of chemical physics 117, 925–943 (2002).
20A. E. Likhtman, S. K. Sukumaran, and J. Ramirez, “Linear viscoelasticity from molecular dynamics
simulation of entangled polymers,” Macromolecules 40, 6748–6757 (2007).
21J. Cao and A. E. Likhtman, “Time-dependent orientation coupling in equilibrium polymer melts,” Physical
review letters 104, 207801 (2010).
22R. Picu and A. Rakshit, “Coarse grained model of diﬀusion in entangled bidisperse polymer melts,” The
Journal of chemical physics 127, 144909 (2007).
23B. L. Peters, K. M. Salerno, T. Ge, D. Perahia, and G. S. Grest, “Eﬀect of chain length dispersity on the
mobility of entangled polymers,” Physical review letters 121, 057802 (2018).
24B. L. Peters, K. M. Salerno, T. Ge, D. Perahia, and G. S. Grest, “Viscoelastic response of dispersed
entangled polymer melts,” Macromolecules 53, 8400–8405 (2020).
25C. Baig, P. S. Stephanou, G. Tsolou, V. G. Mavrantzas, and M. Kr¨oger, “Understanding dynamics in
binary mixtures of entangled cis- 1,4-polybutadiene melts at the level of primitive path segments by
mapping atomistic simulation data onto the tube model,” Macromolecules 43, 8239–8250 (2010).
26Z. Wang and R. G. Larson, “Constraint release in entangled binary blends of linear polymers: A molecular
dynamics study,” Macromolecules 41, 4945–4960 (2008).

27
27S. Shanbhag and Z. Wang, “Molecular simulation of tracer diﬀusion and self-diﬀusion in entangled poly-
mers,” Macromolecules 53, 4649–4658 (2020).
28S. Shanbhag, “Unusual dynamics of ring probes in linear matrices,” Journal of Polymer Science, Part B:
Polymer Physics 55, 169–177 (2017).
29G. S. Grest, “Communication: Polymer entanglement dynamics: Role of attractive interactions,” (2016).
30J. T. Kalathi, S. K. Kumar, M. Rubinstein, and G. S. Grest, “Rouse mode analysis of chain relaxation
in homopolymer melts,” Macromolecules 47, 6925–6931 (2014).
31A. Makke, M. Perez, J. Rottler, O. Lame, and J.-L. Barrat, “Predictors of cavitation in glassy polymers
under tensile strain: A coarse-grained molecular dynamics investigation,” Macromolecular theory and
simulations 20, 826–836 (2011).
32S. Zhang and L. Xi, “Eﬀects of precursor topology on polymer networks simulated with molecular dy-
namics,” Polymer 116, 143–152 (2017).
33L. Xi, “Molecular simulation for predicting the rheological properties of polymer melts,” Molecular Sim-
ulation 45, 1242–1264 (2019).
34S. Plimpton, “Fast parallel algorithms for short-range molecular dynamics,” Tech. Rep. (Sandia National
Labs., Albuquerque, NM (United States), 1993).
35Y. R. Sliozberg and J. W. Andzelm, “Fast protocol for equilibration of entangled and branched polymer
chains,” Chemical Physics Letters 523, 139–143 (2012).
36R. Auhl, R. Everaers, G. S. Grest, K. Kremer, and S. J. Plimpton, “Equilibration of long chain polymer
melts in computer simulations,” The Journal of chemical physics 119, 12718–12728 (2003).
37K. Kremer and G. S. Grest, “Simulations for structural and dynamic properties of dense polymer systems,”
Journal of the Chemical Society, Faraday Transactions 88, 1707–1717 (1992).
38H. P. Hsu and K. Kremer, “Static and dynamic properties of large polymer melts in equilibrium,” Journal
of Chemical Physics 144, 154907 (2016), arXiv:1604.00245.
39W. H. Press, S. A. Teukolsky, B. P. Flannery, and W. T. Vetterling, Numerical recipes in Fortran 77:
volume 1, volume 1 of Fortran numerical recipes: the art of scientiﬁc computing (Cambridge university
press, 1992).
40V. Calandrini, E. Pellegrini, P. Calligari, K. Hinsen, and G. R. Kneller, “nmoldyn-interfacing spectro-
scopic experiments, molecular dynamics simulations and models for time correlation functions,” ´Ecole
th´ematique de la Soci´et´e Fran¸caise de la Neutronique 12, 201–232 (2011).
41J. L. Viovy, M. Rubinstein, and R. H. Colby, “Constraint release in polymer melts: Tube reorganization
versus tube dilation,” Macromolecules 24, 3587–3596 (1991).
42R. C. Picu and A. Rakshit, “Coarse grained model of diﬀusion in entangled bidisperse polymer melts,”
Journal of Chemical Physics 127, 214903 (2007).
43S. Wang, E. D. von Meerwall, S.-Q. Wang, A. Halasa, W.-L. Hsu, J. Zhou, and R. Quirk, “Diﬀusion and
rheology of binary polymer mixtures,” Macromolecules 37, 1641–1651 (2004).
44P. H. Verdier, “Monte carlo studies of lattice-model polymer chains. i. correlation functions in the
statistical-bead model,” The Journal of Chemical Physics 45, 2118–2121 (1966).
45M. Vladkov and J.-L. Barrat, “Linear and nonlinear viscoelasticity of a model unentangled polymer melt:
molecular dynamics and rouse modes analysis,” Macromolecular theory and simulations 15, 252–262
(2006).
46J. T. Kalathi, S. K. Kumar, M. Rubinstein, and G. S. Grest, “Rouse mode analysis of chain relaxation
in polymer nanocomposites,” Soft matter 11, 4123–4132 (2015).
47J. Padding and W. J. Briels, “Uncrossability constraints in mesoscopic polymer melt simulations: non-
rouse behavior of c 120 h 242,” The Journal of Chemical Physics 115, 2846–2859 (2001).
48Y. Li, M. Kr¨oger, and W. K. Liu, “Nanoparticle eﬀect on the dynamics of polymer chains and their
entanglement network,” Physical review letters 109, 118001 (2012).
49L. Xi, M. Shah, and B. L. Trout, “Hopping of water in a glassy polymer studied via transition path
sampling and likelihood maximization,” The Journal of Physical Chemistry B 117, 3634–3647 (2013).
50H. P. Hsu and K. Kremer, “Detailed analysis of Rouse mode and dynamic scattering function of highly
entangled polymer melts in equilibrium,” The European Physical Journal: Special Topics 226, 693–703
(2017).
51P. J. Daivis and D. J. Evans, “Comparison of constant pressure and constant volume nonequilibrium
simulations of sheared model decane,” The Journal of chemical physics 100, 541–547 (1994).
52J. Ram´ırez, S. K. Sukumaran, B. Vorselaars, and A. E. Likhtman, “Eﬃcient on the ﬂy calcula-
tion of time correlation functions in computer simulations,” Journal of Chemical Physics 133 (2010),
10.1063/1.3491098.
53R. Anderssen and D. Mead, “Theoretical derivation of molecular weight scaling for rheological parame-
ters,” Journal of non-newtonian ﬂuid mechanics 76, 299–306 (1998).
54D. Maier, A. Eckstein, C. Friedrich, and J. Honerkamp, “Evaluation of models combining rheological data
with the molecular weight distribution,” Journal of Rheology 42, 1153–1173 (1998).
55W. H. Tuminello, “Determining molecular weight distributions from the rheological properties of polymer
melts,” in Proc. 71st Soc. Rheol. Meeting, Madison, Wisconsin (1999).
56G. Marrucci, “Relaxation by reptation and tube enlargement: A model for polydisperse polymers,” Jour-
nal of Polymer Science: Polymer Physics Edition 23, 159–177 (1985).
57W. Thimm, C. Friedrich, M. Marth, and J. Honerkamp, “On the rouse spectrum and the determination
of the molecular weight distribution from rheological data,” Journal of Rheology 44, 429–438 (2000).

28
58W. H. Tuminello, “Molecular weight and molecular weight distribution from dynamic measurements of
polymer melts,” Polymer Engineering & Science 26, 1339–1347 (1986).
59C. Tsenoglou, “Molecular weight polydispersity eﬀects on the viscoelasticity of entangled linear polymers,”
Macromolecules 24, 1762–1767 (1991).
60J. Des Cloizeaux, “Relaxation of entangled polymers in melts,” Macromolecules 23, 3992–4006 (1990).
