∗This work has been submitted to the IEEE for possible pub-
lication. Copyright may be transferred without notice, after
which this version may no longer be accessible.
CRYO-CARE: CONTENT-AWARE IMAGE RESTORATION
FOR CRYO-TRANSMISSION ELECTRON MICROSCOPY DATA∗
Tim-Oliver Buchholz1,2, Mareike Jordan2, Gaia Pigino2, Florian Jug1,2
1Center for Systems Biology Dresden (CSBD)
2Max-Planck Institute of Molecular Cell Biology and Genetics
ABSTRACT
Multiple approaches to use deep learning for image restora-
tion have recently been proposed. Training such approaches
requires well registered pairs of high and low quality images.
While this is easily achievable for many imaging modali-
ties, e.g. ﬂuorescence light microscopy, for others it is not.
Cryo-transmission electron microscopy (cryo-TEM) could
profoundly beneﬁt from improved denoising methods, un-
fortunately it is one of the latter. Here we show how recent
advances in network training for image restoration tasks, i.e.
denoising, can be applied to cryo-TEM data. We describe our
proposed method and show how it can be applied to single
cryo-TEM projections and whole cryo-tomographic image
volumes. Our proposed restoration method dramatically in-
creases contrast in cryo-TEM images, which improves the
interpretability of the acquired data. Furthermore we show
that automated downstream processing on restored image
data, demonstrated on a dense segmentation task, leads to
improved results.
Index Terms— image restoration, cryo-electron mi-
croscopy, deep learning, denoising
1. INTRODUCTION
Modern cryo-transmission electron microscopy (cryo-
TEM) enables the observation of biological structures in their
native state at high resolution. In order to prevent sample
destruction during image acquisition, the total electron dose
needs to be restricted [1]. This restriction results in noisy,
low contrast acquisitions. In practice, electron microscopists
typically acquire defocused images to trade resolution for
increased contrast. Hence, the existence of better performing
image restoration methods would enable image acquisitions
at low electron dose with reduced defocus and therefore also
at elevated resolution.
For ﬂuorescence microscopy data, deep learning can be
used for content-aware image restoration (CARE) [2]. Data
for training CARE networks requires adequately imaged or
synthetically generated pairs at low and high quality. The
ideas presented in [2] do not translate to cryo-TEM data,
where the before mentioned electron dose prevents the acqui-
sition of non-noisy ground truth images.
Here we present cryo-CARE, a way to train content-
aware restoration networks for cryo-TEM data. Cryo-CARE
can be trained by using registered pairs of noisy images, an
idea that was recently introduced in the context of real-world
RGB and MRI images [3]. More concretely, we show how
single TEM projections and whole tomographic volumes can
be denoised using a strong, learned, and content-aware prior.
We compare our results to simple baseline methods such
as median-ﬁltering or NAD [4]. Despite their simplicity, these
methods are widely used by cryo-TEM experts to improve the
interpretability of their data. Furthermore we show that auto-
mated downstream processing on restored image data leads to
signiﬁcantly improved results.
2. APPROACH AND METHODS
Since cryo-TEM acquisitions suffer from very low signal-to-
noise ratio (SNR) due to the limited electron dose, recording
high SNR ground truth images is not possible. Recently it was
demonstrated that image denoising networks can be trained
without having high SNR images available. Instead, only well
registered pairs of low SNR images are required [3]. Hence,
for cryo-TEM data a combination of CARE and the ideas
from [3] enable us, for the ﬁrst time, to train cryo-CARE
networks.
Network Architecture and Training Procedure:
For all
experiments we used a U-Net [5] of depth two, a convolution
kernel size of three, and a linear activation function at the
last layer. Moreover we used a per-pixel mean squared error
loss. In all experiments we keep 10% of extracted training
patches (see below) as validation set. Note that we use the
open-source CARE framework [2] for all experiments.
2.1. Restoring Single cryo-TEM Projections (P2P)
Here we describe three ways to train cryo-CARE networks on
adequately prepared pairs of cryo-TEM projections. Hence,
we call this approach PROJECTION2PROJECTION or P2P.
P2P-ip, training using acquired image pairs:
The
most straight forward way to combining CARE [2] and
NOISE2NOISE [3] is to acquire pairs of images for which the
noise is independent.
arXiv:1810.05420v2  [cs.CV]  15 Oct 2018

100 nm
(a)
100 nm
(b)
100 nm
(c) P2P-tap
100 nm
(d) P2P-ip
100 nm
(e) P2P-df
Fig. 1.
Cryo-CARE results on a 2D cryo-TEM projec-
tion. Subﬁgures and insets show: raw input data (a), median
ﬁltered restoration baseline (b), Cryo-CARE results when
trained on tomographic tilt-angle pairs (c), on acquired im-
age pairs (d), and on dose-fractionated movie frames (e).
To this end, we acquired such image pairs on a 300 kV
Thermo Fisher cryo-TEM Titan Halo that is equipped with a
K2 direct electron detector from Gatan. More precisely, we
acquired images of Chlamydomonas reinhardtii cilia in dose-
fractionation mode (movie mode) [6], splitted the frames in
two halves, and averaged them without additional alignment,
giving us the equivalent of two independently acquired im-
ages at half the available electron dose each1. From such pairs
of images we extracted 1000 randomly selected patch-pairs of
size 128 × 128 which are used to train a CARE network in
the NOISE2NOISE regime. After training, we use the trained
network to restore all image pairs and retrieve the ﬁnal re-
sult by per-pixel averaging the two individual restorations (see
Fig. 1(d)).
P2P-tap, using tomographic tilt-angle pairs: For readily
acquired, not dose-fractionated data, the previously described
scheme cannot be applied. Archived data for which only sin-
gle acquisition exist can therefore not be used for training
cryo-CARE networks. For existing tilt-series, acquired for
tomographic reconstruction, we asked ourselves if pairs of
neighboring tilt-angles could be used for training. We used
IMOD [7] to align and register all acquired tilt-angles. As be-
1Note that each image in such a pair has an even lower SNR due to the
halved electron dose.
fore, training was performed on 1000 randomly selected patch
pairs of size 128 × 128 taken from adjacent tilt-angle projec-
tions. Final restorations are retrieved by applying the trained
network to both tilt-angles individually (see Fig. 1(c)).
P2P-df, using dose-fractionated movie frames:
Since
our data was acquired on a Gatan K2 direct detector, we were
able to go an additional step further. Instead of using two
acquired images, as described initially, we can leverage the
fact to have many more frames acquired. As it is usually
done during dose-fractionation, we can additionally correct
for motion-blur of the sample by registering the individual
frames using MotionCor2 [8]. We then sum all even and odd
frames to retrieve two images with independent noise. This
interleaved frame-splitting is advantageous because induced
beam damage will be equally shared in both independent im-
ages. Again we trained on 1000 randomly selected patch pairs
of size 128 × 128, and created the ﬁnal restored projection by
applying the network to both images followed by per-pixel
averaging (see Fig. 1(e)).
2.2. Restoration of cryo-TEM Tomograms (T2T)
Also here we present three ways to restore cryo-TEM tomo-
grams. One obvious way is to ﬁrst use P2P cryo-CARE to
restore all tilt-angles individually and then reconstruct a to-
mogram from them. All tomographic reconstructions were
performed with ETOMO, which is part of IMOD [7]. We will
later see that this leads to clearly visible artifacts that can be
mitigated by ﬁrst reconstructing two tomograms, each from
half the available data, and then train a 3D cryo-CARE net-
work in a NOISE2NOISE regime. We call these approaches
collectively TOMO2TOMO, or T2T in short.
T2T-eoa, using even-odd acquisitions: This protocol is
designed to work for conventionally acquired tilt-series, when
no direct detector is available. Here we split all tilted projec-
tions in two sets based on their acquisition number. From all
tilt angles with an even/odd acquisition number, we recon-
structed two data-independent tomograms and used those to
train a 3D cryo-CARE network on 1200 randomly selected
3D sub-volumes of size 64 × 64 × 64. We created the ﬁnal
restored tomogram by applying the trained network to both
tomograms followed by per-pixel averaging (see Fig. 2(d)).
T2T-df, using dose-fractionated movie frames:
In case
the available data was acquired in dose-fractionation mode
(movie mode), we propose a slightly different protocol.
For each tilt-angle, similar to our P2P approach on dose-
fractionated data, we can equally split all frames, align and
sum them. The two sets of independent tilt-angle projections
can then be used to reconstruct two independent tomograms.
We trained as before and created the ﬁnal restored tomogram
by applying the trained network to both tomograms followed
by per-pixel averaging. The advantage of this approach is
that the angular sampling for both tomograms is denser and
consistent, hence leading to better results (see Fig. 2(d)).

50 nm
(a)
50 nm
(b)
50 nm
(c) T2T-eoa
50 nm
(d) T2T-df
inf
20.00
10.00
6.67
5.00
4.00
3.33
2.86
Resolution (nm)
0.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0
Correlation
Raw Data
NAD
T2T-eoa
T2T-df
Fig. 2. Cryo-CARE results on a 3D cryo-TEM tomogram.
Subﬁgures show: a section through the raw tomogram (a),
the non-linear anisotropic diffusion ﬁltered baseline (b), cryo-
CARE results when trained via our proposed T2T-eoa (c)
and T2T-df (d). The graph shows the Fourier shell correla-
tion (FSC) curves of the raw tomogram, the baseline, and our
proposed methods.
2.3. Automated Downstream Analysis
We train a dense segmentation and detection workﬂow for
Chlamydomonas reinhardtii outer dynein arm (ODA). Also
here we use a U-Net [5] trained on manually generated and
with PEET [9, 10] reﬁned ground truth. The predicted seg-
mentation is then normalized and Otsu thresholded [11]. Each
connected component is then ﬁltered according to its size in
voxels. Remaining components are treated as one detected
ODA. Since we had only one hand annotated tomogram, we
split annotations in train and test set, counting 383 and 712,
respectively. We did not use data augmentation.
3. RESULTS
We evaluated all variations of our proposed methods on two
datasets. The ﬁrst one, called TOMO110, was acquired by
ourselves on a 300 kV Thermo Fisher cryo-TEM Titan Halo
with a Gatan K2 direct electron detector. This enables us to
test cryo-CARE variations that require image acquisitions in
dose-fractionation mode (movie mode). The second dataset,
EMPIAR-101102, is publicly available via the EMPIAR
database [12] and consists of a complete tomographic se-
ries of tilted projections. We did not ﬁnd publicly available
raw dose-fractionated data but will make our TOMO110 data
available upon publication.
P2P results are computed on unbinned data and T2T re-
sults are computed on six times binned data.
3.1. P2P Restoration Experiments
We ﬁrst tested P2P-tap, which is applicable to both avail-
able datasets (see Fig. 1(c) and Fig. 3(c)). Using adjacent
tilt-angles pairs during training leads to restored images that
appear blurry. This is due to the relative displacement of in-
dividual structures in the imaged volume when projected at
adjacent tilt-angles.
To circumvent this problem, we train cryo-CARE net-
works on speciﬁcally acquired pairs of images (P2P-ip) and
dose-fractionated movie frames (P2P-df). Restorations using
these networks are shown in Fig. 1(d,e).
Tomographic reconstruction from P2P restored tilt-angles:
A canonical idea to reconstruct denoised tomograms is to use
restored P2P-df tilt angles (like in Fig. 1(e)).
This does,
unfortunately, amplify the missing wedge artifacts at high-
gradient locations (see Fig. 4).
Since neural networks are
complex non-linear ﬁlters and tilt-angle reconstructions are
performed independently, the predicted intensities for a given
structure is not necessarily consistent across restored tilt-
angles. These inconsistent amplitudes are likely the reason
for the ampliﬁcation of the observed missing wedge artifacts.
Nevertheless, this problem can be addressed with the T2T
network training regimes described in Section 2.
3.2. T2T Restoration Experiments
In Fig. 2 we compare T2T even-odd acquisitions and T2T
dose-fractionated to the reconstructed raw tomogram and a
125 nm
(a)
125 nm
(b)
125 nm
(c)
150 nm
(d)
150 nm
(e)
150 nm
(f)
Fig. 3.
Cryo-CARE restoration on the publicly available
EMPIAR-10110 dataset. (a) Raw projection (single tilt an-
gle). (b) Median ﬁltered baseline. (c) Our P2P-tap results.
(d) Raw tomogram. (e) NAD ﬁltered baseline. (d) Our even-
odd T2T restoration.
2http://dx.doi.org/10.6019/EMPIAR-10110

25 nm
(a)
25 nm
(b)
Fig. 4.
Tomogram reconstruction artifacts.
Tomograms
reconstructed from P2P restored tilt-angles lead to strong
missing-wedge artifacts (a). This problem is reduced using
our proposed T2T training scheme (b).
non-linear anisotropic diffusion ﬁltered (NAD) baseline. For
a quantitative comparison we computed the Fourier shell cor-
relation (FSC) for all reconstructions. We computed the FSC
for the raw data directly from the two tomograms we created
for T2T dose-fractionated training. For the NAD ﬁltered to-
mogram and our T2T dose-fractionated results, we computed
the FSC on the ﬁltered and restored data, respectively. For the
T2T even-odd acquisitions we split, as commonly done, the
available tilt-angles in order to compute the FSC. The slices
we show in Fig. 2(a-d) allow a qualitative assessment of the
power of cryo-CARE, while the plotted FSC curves quantify
the gained image quality. Still, the question remains if cryo-
CARE is improving the automated analysis of acquired cryo-
TEM data.
3.3. Cryo-CARE Facilitates Automated Analysis
In order to test if the improved SNR and contrast in restored
cryo-TEM tomograms beneﬁts automated downstream analy-
sis, we implemented a segmentation and detection workﬂow
(described in Section 2.3). Fig. 5 shows results of the exact
same automated analysis performed on raw tomograms and
on cryo-CARE restored data. In Fig. 5 we can appreciate a
signiﬁcant increase in precision and recall when data is ﬁrst
restored and then analyzed.
4. DISCUSSION
In this publication we show how content-aware image restora-
tion can successfully be applied to cryo-TEM data. EM ex-
perts are currently using relatively simple ﬁltering techniques,
i.e. NAD, before manually investigating acquired data. Cryo-
CARE, as we have shown, leads to highly contrasted and
well resolved 2D and 3D data. Our experiments also show
that P2P reconstructions are not ideal for tomographic re-
constructions. Nevertheless, with T2T we can offer a sim-
ple and powerful tool for content-aware tomographic restora-
tions. We therefore believe that cryo-CARE will facilitate
manual data browsing, a step that can hardly be underesti-
mated when many and/or large volumes have to be browsed
for regions of interest.
Additionally we showed that cryo-CARE restorations can
lead to highly improved automated analysis results. An essen-
200 nm
(a)
200 nm
(b)
0.82
0.84
0.86
0.88
0.90
0.92
0.94
Recall
0.6
0.8
1.0
Precision
cryo-CARE
Raw Data
Size
10
300
Fig. 5.
Automated downstream analysis on raw data (a)
and a T2T-df restored tomogram (b). Ground-truth voxels
are shown in violet, true-positives in turquoise, and false-
positives in orange. Precision-recall plots on increasing seg-
ment size threshold (see main text) are shown below. The
pentagons correspond to sub-ﬁgures (a) and (b).
tial feature of cryo-CARE is that training data can be gener-
ated by the microscope itself and does not require tedious hu-
man labeling. While end-to-end pipelines on raw data might
need huge amounts of labeled data to also co-learn to restore
the noisy data, cryo-CARE helps to uncouple these two tasks
– a preprocessing step that does not need human labels and a
analysis stage that is likely to require lesser amounts of train-
ing data.
We are conﬁdent that cryo-CARE will rapidly ﬁnd ap-
plication in the cryo-EM ﬁeld. It improves data-browsing,
creates well contrasted, high SNR images for improved visu-
alization of single projections/tomograms, and improves the
performance of automated analysis pipelines, hence it enables
to work efﬁciently on much larger bodies of data.

5. REFERENCES
[1] E Knapek and J Dubochet, “Beam damage to organic
material is considerably reduced in cryo-electron mi-
croscopy,” Journal of molecular biology, vol. 141, no.
2, pp. 147–161, 1980.
[2] Martin Weigert, Uwe Schmidt, Tobias Boothe, M An-
dreas, Alexander Dibrov, Akanksha Jain, Benjamin Wil-
helm, Deborah Schmidt, Coleman Broaddus, Siˆan Cul-
ley, et al.,
“Content-aware image restoration: push-
ing the limits of ﬂuorescence microscopy,” bioRxiv, p.
236463, 2017.
[3] Jaakko Lehtinen, Jacob Munkberg, Jon Hasselgren,
Samuli Laine, Tero Karras, Miika Aittala, and Timo
Aila, “Noise2noise: Learning image restoration without
clean data,” arXiv preprint arXiv:1803.04189, 2018.
[4] Achilleas S Frangakis and Reiner Hegerl,
“Noise re-
duction in electron tomographic reconstructions using
nonlinear anisotropic diffusion,” Journal of structural
biology, vol. 135, no. 3, pp. 239–250, 2001.
[5] Olaf Ronneberger, Philipp Fischer, and Thomas Brox,
“U-net: Convolutional networks for biomedical image
segmentation,”
in International Conference on Med-
ical image computing and computer-assisted interven-
tion. Springer, 2015, pp. 234–241.
[6] Xueming Li, Paul Mooney, Shawn Zheng, Christo-
pher R Booth, Michael B Braunfeld, Sander Gubbens,
David A Agard, and Yifan Cheng,
“Electron count-
ing and beam-induced motion correction enable near-
atomic-resolution single-particle cryo-em,”
Nature
methods, vol. 10, no. 6, pp. 584, 2013.
[7] James R Kremer, David N Mastronarde, and J Richard
McIntosh,
“Computer
visualization
of
three-
dimensional image data using imod,”
Journal of
structural biology, vol. 116, no. 1, pp. 71–76, 1996.
[8] Shawn Zheng, Eugene Palovcak, Jean-Paul Armache,
Yifan Cheng, and David Agard, “Anisotropic correction
of beam-induced motion for improved single-particle
electron cryo-microscopy,” bioRxiv, 2016.
[9] Daniela Nicastro,
Cindi Schwartz,
Jason Pierson,
Richard Gaudette, Mary E. Porter, and J Richard McIn-
tosh, “The molecular architecture of axonemes revealed
by cryoelectron tomography.,”
Science, vol. 313, no.
5789, pp. 944–948, 2006.
[10] John M. Heumann, Andreas Hoenger, and David N.
Mastronarde, “Clustering and variance maps for cryo-
electron tomography using wedge-masked differences.,”
J Struct Biol, vol. 175, no. 3, pp. 288–299, 2011.
[11] Nobuyuki Otsu,
“A threshold selection method from
gray-level histograms,” IEEE transactions on systems,
man, and cybernetics, vol. 9, no. 1, pp. 62–66, 1979.
[12] Andrii Iudin, Paul K Korir, Jos´e Salavert-Torres, Ger-
ard J Kleywegt, and Ardan Patwardhan,
“Empiar: a
public archive for raw electron microscopy image data,”
Nature methods, vol. 13, no. 5, pp. 387, 2016.
