Determinantal point processes for machine learning
Alex Kulesza
Ben Taskar
Abstract
Determinantal point processes (DPPs) are elegant probabilistic models of repulsion
that arise in quantum physics and random matrix theory. In contrast to traditional
structured models like Markov random ﬁelds, which become intractable and hard to
approximate in the presence of negative correlations, DPPs oﬀer eﬃcient and exact
algorithms for sampling, marginalization, conditioning, and other inference tasks. We
provide a gentle introduction to DPPs, focusing on the intuitions, algorithms, and
extensions that are most relevant to the machine learning community, and show how
DPPs can be applied to real-world applications like ﬁnding diverse sets of high-quality
search results, building informative summaries by selecting diverse sentences from
documents, modeling non-overlapping human poses in images or video, and automatically
building timelines of important news stories.
1
Introduction
Probabilistic modeling and learning techniques have become indispensable tools for analyzing
data, discovering patterns, and making predictions in a variety of real-world settings. In
recent years, the widespread availability of both data and processing capacity has led to
new applications and methods involving more complex, structured output spaces, where the
goal is to simultaneously make a large number of interrelated decisions. Unfortunately, the
introduction of structure typically involves a combinatorial explosion of output possibilities,
making inference computationally impractical without further assumptions.
A popular compromise is to employ graphical models, which are tractable when the
graph encoding local interactions between variables is a tree. For loopy graphs, inference
can often be approximated in the special case when the interactions between variables are
positive and neighboring nodes tend to have the same labels. However, dealing with global,
negative interactions in graphical models remains intractable, and heuristic methods often
fail in practice.
Determinantal point processes (DPPs) oﬀer a promising and complementary approach.
Arising in quantum physics and random matrix theory, DPPs are elegant probabilistic models
of global, negative correlations, and oﬀer eﬃcient algorithms for sampling, marginalization,
conditioning, and other inference tasks.
While they have been studied extensively by
mathematicians, giving rise to a deep and beautiful theory, DPPs are relatively new in
machine learning. We aim to provide a comprehensible introduction to DPPs, focusing on
the intuitions, algorithms, and extensions that are most relevant to our community.
1
arXiv:1207.6083v4  [stat.ML]  10 Jan 2013

Figure 1: Diversity is used to generate a set of summary timelines describing the most
important events from a large news corpus.
1.1
Diversity
A DPP is a distribution over subsets of a ﬁxed ground set, for instance, sets of search results
selected from a large database. Equivalently, a DPP over a ground set of N items can be
seen as modeling a binary characteristic vector of length N. The essential characteristic of a
DPP is that these binary variables are negatively correlated; that is, the inclusion of one item
makes the inclusion of other items less likely. The strengths of these negative correlations
are derived from a kernel matrix that deﬁnes a global measure of similarity between pairs
of items, so that more similar items are less likely to co-occur. As a result, DPPs assign
higher probability to sets of items that are diverse; for example, a DPP will prefer search
results that cover multiple distinct aspects of a user’s query, rather than focusing on the
most popular or salient one.
This focus on diversity places DPPs alongside a number of recently developed techniques
for working with diverse sets, particularly in the information retrieval community [Carbonell
and Goldstein, 1998, Zhai et al., 2003, Chen and Karger, 2006, Yue and Joachims, 2008,
Radlinski et al., 2008, Swaminathan et al., 2009, Raman et al., 2012]. However, unlike these
methods, DPPs are fully probabilistic, opening the door to a wider variety of potential
applications, without compromising algorithmic tractability.
The general concept of diversity can take on a number of forms depending on context
and application. Including multiple kinds of search results might be seen as covering or
summarizing relevant interpretations of the query or its associated topics; see Figure 1.
Alternatively, items inhabiting a continuous space may exhibit diversity as a result of
repulsion, as in Figure 2. In fact, certain repulsive quantum particles are known to be
precisely described by a DPP; however, a DPP can also serve as a model for general repulsive
phenomena, such as the locations of trees in a forest, which appear diverse due to physical
and resource constraints. Finally, diversity can be used as a ﬁltering prior when multiple
selections must be based on a single detector or scoring metric. For instance, in Figure 3
a weak pose detector favors large clusters of poses that are nearly identical, but ﬁltering
through a DPP ensures that the ﬁnal predictions are well-separated.
Throughout this survey we demonstrate applications for DPPs in a variety of settings,
including:
• The DUC 2003/2004 text summarization task, where we form extractive summaries of
news articles by choosing diverse subsets of sentences (Section 4.2.1);
2

Figure 2: On the left, points are sampled randomly; on the right, repulsion between points
leads to the selection of a diverse set of locations.
Figure 3: On the left, the output of a human pose detector is noisy and uncertain; on the
right, applying diversity as a ﬁlter leads to a clean, separated set of predictions.
• An image search task, where we model human judgments of diversity for image sets
returned by Google Image Search (Section 5.3);
• A multiple pose estimation task, where we improve the detection of human poses in
images from television shows by incorporating a bias toward non-overlapping predictions
(Section 6.4);
• A news threading task, where we automatically extract timelines of important news
stories from a large corpus by balancing intra-timeline coherence with inter-timeline
diversity (Section 6.6.4).
1.2
Outline
In this paper we present general mathematical background on DPPs along with a range of
modeling extensions, eﬃcient algorithms, and theoretical results that aim to enable practical
modeling and learning. The material is organized as follows.
Section 2: Determinantal point processes.
We begin with an introduction to deter-
minantal point processes tailored to the interests of the machine learning community. We
focus on discrete DPPs, emphasizing intuitions and including new, simpliﬁed proofs for some
theoretical results. We provide descriptions of known eﬃcient inference algorithms, and
characterize their computational properties.
3

Section 3: Representation and algorithms.
We describe a decomposition of the DPP
that makes explicit its fundamental tradeoﬀbetween quality and diversity. We compare
the expressive power of DPPs and MRFs, characterizing the tradeoﬀs in terms of modeling
power and computational eﬃciency. We also introduce a dual representation for DPPs,
showing how it can be used to perform eﬃcient inference over large ground sets. When
the data are high-dimensional and dual inference is still too slow, we show that random
projections can be used to maintain a provably close approximation to the original model
while greatly reducing computational requirements.
Section 4: Learning.
We derive an eﬃcient algorithm for learning the parameters of a
quality model when the diversity model is held ﬁxed. We employ this learning algorithm to
perform extractive summarization of news text.
Section 5: k-DPPs.
We present an extension of DPPs that allows for explicit control
over the number of items selected by the model. We show not only that this extension solves
an important practical problem, but also that it increases expressive power: a k-DPP can
capture distributions that a standard DPP cannot. The extension to k-DPPs necessitates
new algorithms for eﬃcient inference based on recursions for the elementary symmetric
polynomials. We validate the new model experimentally on an image search task.
Section 6: Structured DPPs.
We extend DPPs to model diverse sets of structured items,
such as sequences or trees, where there are combinatorially many possible conﬁgurations.
In this setting the number of possible subsets is doubly-exponential, presenting a daunting
computational challenge. However, we show that a factorization of the quality and diversity
models together with the dual representation for DPPs makes eﬃcient inference possible
using second-order message passing. We demonstrate structured DPPs on a toy geographical
paths problem, a still-image multiple pose estimation task, and two high-dimensional text
threading tasks.
2
Determinantal point processes
Determinantal point processes (DPPs) were ﬁrst identiﬁed as a class by Macchi [1975], who
called them “fermion processes” because they give the distributions of fermion systems
at thermal equilibrium. The Pauli exclusion principle states that no two fermions can
occupy the same quantum state; as a consequence fermions exhibit what is known as the
“anti-bunching” eﬀect. This repulsion is described precisely by a DPP.
In fact, years before Macchi gave them a general treatment, speciﬁc DPPs appeared
in major results in random matrix theory [Mehta and Gaudin, 1960, Dyson, 1962a,b,c,
Ginibre, 1965], where they continue to play an important role [Diaconis, 2003, Johansson,
2005b]. Recently, DPPs have attracted a ﬂurry of attention in the mathematics community
[Borodin and Olshanski, 2000, Borodin and Soshnikov, 2003, Borodin and Rains, 2005,
Borodin et al., 2010, Burton and Pemantle, 1993, Johansson, 2002, 2004, 2005a, Okounkov,
2001, Okounkov and Reshetikhin, 2003, Shirai and Takahashi, 2000], and much progress has
been made in understanding their formal combinatorial and probabilistic properties. The
4

term “determinantal” was ﬁrst used by Borodin and Olshanski [2000], and has since become
accepted as standard. Many good mathematical surveys are now available [Borodin, 2009,
Hough et al., 2006, Shirai and Takahashi, 2003a,b, Lyons, 2003, Soshnikov, 2000, Tao, 2009].
We begin with an overview of the aspects of DPPs most relevant to the machine learning
community, emphasizing intuitions, algorithms, and computational properties.
2.1
Deﬁnition
A point process P on a ground set Y is a probability measure over “point patterns” or “point
conﬁgurations” of Y, which are ﬁnite subsets of Y. For instance, Y could be a continuous time
interval during which a scientist records the output of a brain electrode, with P({y1, y2, y3})
characterizing the likelihood of seeing neural spikes at times y1, y2, and y3. Depending on
the experiment, the spikes might tend to cluster together, or they might occur independently,
or they might tend to spread out in time. P captures these correlations.
For the remainder of this paper, we will focus on discrete, ﬁnite point processes, where
we assume without loss of generality that Y = {1, 2, . . . , N}; in this setting we sometimes
refer to elements of Y as items. Much of our discussion extends to the continuous case, but
the discrete setting is computationally simpler and often more appropriate for real-world
data—e.g., in practice, the electrode voltage will only be sampled at discrete intervals. The
distinction will become even more apparent when we apply our methods to Y with no natural
continuous interpretation, such as the set of documents in a corpus.
In the discrete case, a point process is simply a probability measure on 2Y, the set of all
subsets of Y. A sample from P might be the empty set, the entirety of Y, or anything in
between. P is called a determinantal point process if, when Y is a random subset drawn
according to P, we have, for every A ⊆Y,
P(A ⊆Y ) = det(KA)
(1)
for some real, symmetric N × N matrix K indexed by the elements of Y.1 Here, KA ≡
[Kij]i,j∈A denotes the restriction of K to the entries indexed by elements of A, and we adopt
det(K∅) = 1. Note that normalization is unnecessary here, since we are deﬁning marginal
probabilities that need not sum to 1.
Since P is a probability measure, all principal minors det(KA) of K must be nonnegative,
and thus K itself must be positive semideﬁnite. It is possible to show in the same way that
the eigenvalues of K are bounded above by one using Equation (27), which we introduce
later. These requirements turn out to be suﬃcient: any K, 0 ⪯K ⪯I, deﬁnes a DPP. This
will be a consequence of Theorem 2.3.
We refer to K as the marginal kernel since it contains all the information needed to
compute the probability of any subset A being included in Y . A few simple observations
follow from Equation (1). If A = {i} is a singleton, then we have
P(i ∈Y ) = Kii .
(2)
That is, the diagonal of K gives the marginal probabilities of inclusion for individual elements
of Y. Diagonal entries close to 1 correspond to elements of Y that are almost always selected
1In general, K need not be symmetric. However, in the interest of simplicity, we proceed with this
assumption; it is not a signiﬁcant limitation for our purposes.
5

Figure 4: A set of points in the plane drawn from a DPP (left), and the same number of
points sampled independently using a Poisson point process (right).
by the DPP. Furthermore, if A = {i, j} is a two-element set, then
P(i, j ∈Y ) =

Kii
Kij
Kji
Kjj

(3)
= KiiKjj −KijKji
(4)
= P(i ∈Y )P(j ∈Y ) −K2
ij .
(5)
Thus, the oﬀ-diagonal elements determine the negative correlations between pairs of elements:
large values of Kij imply that i and j tend not to co-occur.
Equation (5) demonstrates why DPPs are “diversifying”. If we think of the entries of
the marginal kernel as measurements of similarity between pairs of elements in Y, then
highly similar elements are unlikely to appear together. If Kij =
p
KiiKjj, then i and j
are “perfectly similar” and do not appear together almost surely. Conversely, when K is
diagonal there are no correlations and the elements appear independently. Note that DPPs
cannot represent distributions where elements are more likely to co-occur than if they were
independent: correlations are always nonpositive.
Figure 4 shows the diﬀerence between sampling a set of points in the plane using a
DPP (with Kij inversely related to the distance between points i and j), which leads to
a relatively uniformly spread set with good coverage, and sampling points independently,
which results in random clumping.
2.1.1
Examples
In this paper, our focus is on using DPPs to model real-world data.
However, many
theoretical point processes turn out to be exactly determinantal, which is one of the main
reasons they have received so much recent attention. In this section we brieﬂy describe a few
examples; some of them are quite remarkable on their own, and as a whole they oﬀer some
intuition about the types of distributions that are realizable by DPPs. Technical details for
each example can be found in the accompanying reference.
Descents in random sequences [Borodin et al., 2010]
Given a sequence of N random
numbers drawn uniformly and independently from a ﬁnite set (say, the digits 0–9), the
locations in the sequence where the current number is less than the previous number form
6

a subset of {2, 3, . . . , N}.
This subset is distributed as a determinantal point process.
Intuitively, if the current number is less than the previous number, it is probably not too
large, thus it becomes less likely that the next number will be smaller yet. In this sense, the
positions of decreases repel one another.
Non-intersecting random walks [Johansson, 2004]
Consider a set of k independent,
simple, symmetric random walks of length T on the integers. That is, each walk is a
sequence x1, x2, . . . , xT where xi −xi+1 is either -1 or +1 with equal probability. If we
let the walks begin at positions x1
1, x2
1, . . . , xk
1 and condition on the fact that they end at
positions x1
T , x2
T , . . . , xk
T and do not intersect, then the positions x1
t , x2
t , . . . , xk
t at any time t
are a subset of Z and distributed according to a DPP. Intuitively, if the random walks do
not intersect, then at any time step they are likely to be far apart.
Edges in random spanning trees [Burton and Pemantle, 1993]
Let G be an arbitrary
ﬁnite graph with N edges, and let T be a random spanning tree chosen uniformly from the
set of all the spanning trees of G. The edges in T form a subset of the edges of G that is
distributed as a DPP. The marginal kernel in this case is the transfer-impedance matrix,
whose entry Ke1e2 is the expected signed number of traversals of edge e2 when a random
walk begins at one endpoint of e1 and ends at the other (the graph edges are ﬁrst oriented
arbitrarily). Thus, edges that are in some sense “nearby” in G are similar according to K,
and as a result less likely to participate in a single uniformly chosen spanning tree. As this
example demonstrates, some DPPs assign zero probability to sets whose cardinality is not
equal to a particular k; in this case, k is the number of nodes in the graph minus one—the
number of edges in any spanning tree. We will return to this issue in Section 5.
Eigenvalues of random matrices [Ginibre, 1965, Mehta and Gaudin, 1960]
Let M be
a random matrix obtained by drawing every entry independently from the complex normal
distribution. This is the complex Ginibre ensemble. The eigenvalues of M, which form
a ﬁnite subset of the complex plane, are distributed according to a DPP. If a Hermitian
matrix is generated in the corresponding way, drawing each diagonal entry from the normal
distribution and each pair of oﬀ-diagonal entries from the complex normal distribution, then
we obtain the Gaussian unitary ensemble, and the eigenvalues are now a DPP-distributed
subset of the real line.
Aztec diamond tilings [Johansson, 2005a]
The Aztec diamond is a diamond-shaped
union of lattice squares, as depicted in Figure 5a. (Half of the squares have been colored
gray in a checkerboard pattern.) A domino tiling is a perfect cover of the Aztec diamond
using 2 × 1 rectangles, as in Figure 5b. Suppose that we draw a tiling uniformly at random
from among all possible tilings. (The number of tilings is known to be exponential in the
width of the diamond.) We can identify this tiling with the subset of the squares that are
(a) painted gray in the checkerboard pattern and (b) covered by the left half of a horizontal
tile or the bottom half of a vertical tile (see Figure 5c). This subset is distributed as a DPP.
7

(a) Aztec diamond (checkered)
(b) Domino tiling
(c) DPP
Figure 5: Aztec diamonds.
2.2
L-ensembles
For the purposes of modeling real data, it is useful to slightly restrict the class of DPPs
by focusing on L-ensembles. First introduced by Borodin and Rains [2005], an L-ensemble
deﬁnes a DPP not through the marginal kernel K, but through a real, symmetric matrix L
indexed by the elements of Y:
PL(Y = Y ) ∝det(LY ) .
(6)
Whereas Equation (1) gave the marginal probabilities of inclusion for subsets A, Equation (6)
directly speciﬁes the atomic probabilities for every possible instantiation of Y . As for K, it
is easy to see that L must be positive semideﬁnite. However, since Equation (6) is only a
statement of proportionality, the eigenvalues of L need not be less than one; any positive
semideﬁnite L deﬁnes an L-ensemble. The required normalization constant can be given in
closed form due to the fact that P
Y ⊆Y det(LY ) = det(L + I), where I is the N × N identity
matrix. This is a special case of the following theorem.
Theorem 2.1. For any A ⊆Y,
X
A⊆Y ⊆Y
det(LY ) = det(L + I ¯
A) ,
(7)
where I ¯
A is the diagonal matrix with ones in the diagonal positions corresponding to elements
of ¯A = Y −A, and zeros everywhere else.
Proof. Suppose that A = Y; then Equation (7) holds trivially. Now suppose inductively that
the theorem holds whenever ¯A has cardinality less than k. Given A such that | ¯A| = k > 0,
let i be an element of Y where i ∈¯A.
Splitting blockwise according to the partition
Y = {i} ∪Y −{i}, we can write
L + I ¯
A =
 Lii + 1
Li¯i
L¯ii
LY−{i} + IY−{i}−A

,
(8)
8

where L¯ii is the subcolumn of the ith column of L whose rows correspond to ¯i, and similarly
for Li¯i. By multilinearity of the determinant, then,
det(L + I ¯
A) =

Lii
Li¯i
L¯ii
LY−{i} + IY−{i}−A
 +

1
0
L¯ii
LY−{i} + IY−{i}−A

(9)
= det(L + IA∪{i}) + det(LY−{i} + IY−{i}−A) .
(10)
We can now apply the inductive hypothesis separately to each term, giving
det(L + I ¯
A) =
X
A∪{i}⊆Y ⊆Y
det(LY ) +
X
A⊆Y ⊆Y−{i}
det(LY )
(11)
=
X
A⊆Y ⊆Y
det(LY ) ,
(12)
where we observe that every Y either contains i and is included only in the ﬁrst sum, or
does not contain i and is included only in the second sum.
Thus we have
PL(Y = Y ) =
det(LY )
det(L + I) .
(13)
As a shorthand, we will write PL(Y ) instead of PL(Y = Y ) when the meaning is clear.
We can write a version of Equation (5) for L-ensembles, showing that if L is a measure
of similarity then diversity is preferred:
PL({i, j}) ∝PL({i})PL({j}) −

Lij
det(L + I)
2
.
(14)
In this case we are reasoning about the full contents of Y rather than its marginals, but the
intuition is essentially the same. Furthermore, we have the following result of Macchi [1975].
Theorem 2.2. An L-ensemble is a DPP, and its marginal kernel is
K = L(L + I)−1 = I −(L + I)−1 .
(15)
Proof. Using Theorem 2.1, the marginal probability of a set A is
PL(A ⊆Y ) =
P
A⊆Y ⊆Y det(LY )
P
Y ⊆Y det(LY )
(16)
= det(L + I ¯
A)
det(L + I)
(17)
= det
 (L + I ¯
A)(L + I)−1
.
(18)
We can use the fact that L(L + I)−1 = I −(L + I)−1 to simplify and obtain
PL(A ⊆Y ) = det
 I ¯
A(L + I)−1 + I −(L + I)−1
(19)
= det
 I −IA(L + I)−1
(20)
= det (I ¯
A + IAK) ,
(21)
9

where we let K = I −(L + I)−1. Now, we observe that left multiplication by IA zeros out
all the rows of a matrix except those corresponding to A. Therefore we can split blockwise
using the partition Y = ¯A ∪A to get
det (I ¯
A + IAK) =

I| ¯
A|×| ¯
A|
0
KA ¯
A
KA

(22)
= det (KA) .
(23)
Note that K can be computed from an eigendecomposition of L = PN
n=1 λnvnv⊤
n by a
simple rescaling of eigenvalues:
K =
N
X
n=1
λn
λn + 1vnv⊤
n .
(24)
Conversely, we can ask when a DPP with marginal kernel K is also an L-ensemble. By
inverting Equation (15), we have
L = K(I −K)−1 ,
(25)
and again the computation can be performed by eigendecomposition. However, while the
inverse in Equation (15) always exists due to the positive coeﬃcient on the identity matrix,
the inverse in Equation (25) may not. In particular, when any eigenvalue of K achieves the
upper bound of 1, the DPP is not an L-ensemble. We will see later that the existence of the
inverse in Equation (25) is equivalent to P giving nonzero probability to the empty set. (This
is somewhat analogous to the positive probability assumption in the Hammersley-Cliﬀord
theorem for Markov random ﬁelds.) This is not a major restriction, for two reasons. First,
when modeling real data we must typically allocate some nonzero probability for rare or
noisy events, so when cardinality is one of the aspects we wish to model, the condition is not
unreasonable. Second, we will show in Section 5 how to control the cardinality of samples
drawn from the DPP, thus sidestepping the representational limits of L-ensembles.
Modulo the restriction described above, K and L oﬀer alternative representations of
DPPs. Under both representations, subsets that have higher diversity, as measured by the
corresponding kernel, have higher likelihood. However, while K gives marginal probabilities,
L-ensembles directly model the atomic probabilities of observing each subset of Y, which
oﬀers an appealing target for optimization. Furthermore, L need only be positive semideﬁnite,
while the eigenvalues of K are bounded above. For these reasons we will focus our modeling
eﬀorts on DPPs represented as L-ensembles.
2.2.1
Geometry
Determinants have an intuitive geometric interpretation. Let B be a D x N matrix such
that L = B⊤B. (Such a B can always be found for D ≤N when L is positive semideﬁnite.)
Denote the columns of B by Bi for i = 1, 2, . . . , N. Then:
PL(Y ) ∝det(LY ) = Vol2({Bi}i∈Y ) ,
(26)
10

(a)
(b)
(c)
Figure 6: A geometric view of DPPs: each vector corresponds to an element of Y. (a) The
probability of a subset Y is the square of the volume spanned by its associated feature
vectors. (b) As the magnitude of an item’s feature vector increases, so do the probabilities of
sets containing that item. (c) As the similarity between two items increases, the probabilities
of sets containing both of them decrease.
where the right hand side is the squared |Y |-dimensional volume of the parallelepiped
spanned by the columns of B corresponding to elements in Y .
Intuitively, we can think of the columns of B as feature vectors describing the elements
of Y. Then the kernel L measures similarity using dot products between feature vectors,
and Equation (26) says that the probability assigned by a DPP to a set Y is related to the
volume spanned by its associated feature vectors. This is illustrated in Figure 6.
From this intuition we can verify several important DPP properties. Diverse sets are
more probable because their feature vectors are more orthogonal, and hence span larger
volumes. Items with parallel feature vectors are selected together with probability zero,
since their feature vectors deﬁne a degenerate parallelepiped. All else being equal, items
with large-magnitude feature vectors are more likely to appear, because they multiply the
spanned volumes for sets containing them.
We will revisit these intuitions in Section 3.1, where we decompose the kernel L so as to
separately model the direction and magnitude of the vectors Bi.
2.3
Properties
In this section we review several useful properties of DPPs.
Restriction
If Y is distributed as a DPP with marginal kernel K, then Y ∩A, where
A ⊆Y, is also distributed as a DPP, with marginal kernel KA.
11

Complement
If Y is distributed as a DPP with marginal kernel K, then Y −Y is also
distributed as a DPP, with marginal kernel ¯K = I −K. In particular, we have
P(A ∩Y = ∅) = det( ¯KA) = det(I −KA) ,
(27)
where I indicates the identity matrix of appropriate size. It may seem counterintuitive that
the complement of a diversifying process should also encourage diversity. However, it is easy
to see that
P(i, j̸ ∈Y ) = 1 −P(i ∈Y ) −P(j ∈Y ) + P(i, j ∈Y )
(28)
≤1 −P(i ∈Y ) −P(j ∈Y ) + P(i ∈Y )P(j ∈Y )
(29)
= P(i̸ ∈Y ) + P(j̸ ∈Y ) −1 + (1 −P(i̸ ∈Y ))(1 −P(j̸ ∈Y ))
(30)
= P(i̸ ∈Y )P(j̸ ∈Y ) ,
(31)
where the inequality follows from Equation (5).
Domination
If K ⪯K′, that is, K′ −K is positive semideﬁnite, then for all A ⊆Y we
have
det(KA) ≤det(K′
A) .
(32)
In other words, the DPP deﬁned by K′ is larger than the one deﬁned by K in the sense that
it assigns higher marginal probabilities to every set A. An analogous result fails to hold for
L due to the normalization constant.
Scaling
If K = γK′ for some 0 ≤γ < 1, then for all A ⊆Y we have
det(KA) = γ|A| det(K′
A) .
(33)
It is easy to see that K deﬁnes the distribution obtained by taking a random set distributed
according to the DPP with marginal kernel K′, and then independently deleting each of its
elements with probability 1 −γ.
Cardinality
Let λ1, λ2, . . . , λN be the eigenvalues of L. Then |Y | is distributed as the
number of successes in N Bernoulli trials, where trial n succeeds with probability
λn
λn+1.
This fact follows from Theorem 2.3, which we prove in the next section. One immediate
consequence is that |Y | cannot be larger than rank(L).
More generally, the expected
cardinality of Y is
E[|Y |] =
N
X
n=1
λn
λn + 1 = tr(K) ,
(34)
and the variance is
Var(|Y |) =
N
X
n=1
λn
(λn + 1)2 .
(35)
Note that, by Equation (15),
λ1
λ1+1,
λ2
λ2+1, . . . ,
λN
λN+1 are the eigenvalues of K. Figure 7 shows a
plot of the function f(λ) =
λ
λ+1. It is easy to see from this why the class of L-ensembles does
12

0
5
10
15
20
25
30
0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1
λ (L eigenvalue)
λ/(1+λ) (K eigenvalue)
Figure 7: The mapping between eigenvalues of L and K.
not include DPPs where the empty set has probability zero—at least one of the Bernoulli
trials would need to always succeed, and in turn one or more of the eigenvalues of L would
be inﬁnite.
In some instances, the sum of Bernoullis may be an appropriate model for uncertain
cardinality in real-world data, for instance when identifying objects in images where the
number of objects is unknown in advance. In other situations, it may be more practical to
ﬁx the cardinality of Y up front, for instance when a set of exactly ten search results is
desired, or to replace the sum of Bernoullis with an alternative cardinality model. We show
how these goals can be can be achieved in Section 5.
2.4
Inference
One of the primary advantages of DPPs is that, although the number of possible realizations
of Y is exponential in N, many types of inference can be performed in polynomial time. In
this section we review the inference questions that can (and cannot) be answered eﬃciently.
We also discuss the empirical practicality of the associated computations and algorithms,
estimating the largest values of N that can be handled at interactive speeds (within 2–3
seconds) as well as under more generous time and memory constraints. The reference
machine used for estimating real-world performance has eight Intel Xeon E5450 3Ghz cores
and 32GB of memory.
2.4.1
Normalization
As we have already seen, the partition function, despite being a sum over 2N terms, can be
written in closed form as det(L + I). Determinants of N × N matrices can be computed
through matrix decomposition in O(N3) time, or reduced to matrix multiplication for better
asymptotic performance. The Coppersmith-Winograd algorithm, for example, can be used
to compute determinants in about O(N2.376) time. Going forward, we will use ω to denote
the exponent of whatever matrix multiplication algorithm is used.
Practically speaking, modern computers can calculate determinants up to N ≈5,000 at
interactive speeds, or up to N ≈40,000 in about ﬁve minutes. When N grows much larger,
the memory required simply to store the matrix becomes limiting. (Sparse storage of larger
matrices is possible, but computing determinants remains prohibitively expensive unless the
level of sparsity is extreme.)
13

2.4.2
Marginalization
The marginal probability of any set of items A can be computed using the marginal kernel
as in Equation (1). From Equation (27) we can also compute the marginal probability that
none of the elements in A appear. (We will see below how marginal probabilities of arbitrary
conﬁgurations can be computed using conditional DPPs.)
If the DPP is speciﬁed as an L-ensemble, then the computational bottleneck for marginal-
ization is the computation of K. The dominant operation is the matrix inversion, which
requires at least O(Nω) time by reduction to multiplication, or O(N3) using Gauss-Jordan
elimination or various matrix decompositions, such as the eigendecomposition method pro-
posed in Section 2.2. Since an eigendecomposition of the kernel will be central to sampling,
the latter approach is often the most practical when working with DPPs.
Matrices up to N ≈2,000 can be inverted at interactive speeds, and problems up to
N ≈20,000 can be completed in about ten minutes.
2.4.3
Conditioning
The distribution obtained by conditioning a DPP on the event that none of the elements in
a set A appear is easy to compute. For B ⊆Y not intersecting with A we have
PL(Y = B | A ∩Y = ∅) =
PL(Y = B)
PL(A ∩Y = ∅)
(36)
=
det(LB)
P
B′:B′∩A=∅det(LB′)
(37)
=
det(LB)
det(L ¯
A + I) ,
(38)
where L ¯
A is the restriction of L to the rows and columns indexed by elements in Y −A. In
other words, the conditional distribution (over subsets of Y −A) is itself a DPP, and its
kernel L ¯
A is obtained by simply dropping the rows and columns of L that correspond to
elements in A.
We can also condition a DPP on the event that all of the elements in a set A are observed.
For B not intersecting with A we have
PL(Y = A ∪B | A ⊆Y ) = PL(Y = A ∪B)
PL(A ⊆Y )
(39)
=
det(LA∪B)
P
B′:B′∩A=∅det(LA∪B′)
(40)
= det(LA∪B)
det(L + I ¯
A) ,
(41)
where I ¯
A is the matrix with ones in the diagonal entries indexed by elements of Y −A and
zeros everywhere else. Though it is not immediately obvious, Borodin and Rains [2005]
showed that this conditional distribution (over subsets of Y −A) is again a DPP, with a
kernel given by
LA =
 
(L + I ¯
A)−1
¯
A
−1 −I .
(42)
14

(Following the N × N inversion, the matrix is restricted to rows and columns indexed by
elements in Y −A, then inverted again.) It is easy to show that the inverses exist if and
only if the probability of A appearing is nonzero.
Combining Equation (38) and Equation (41), we can write the conditional DPP given
an arbitrary combination of appearing and non-appearing elements:
PL(Y = Ain ∪B | Ain ⊆Y , Aout ∩Y = ∅) =
det(LAin∪B)
det(L ¯
Aout + I ¯
Ain) .
(43)
The corresponding kernel is
LAin
¯
Aout =
 
(L ¯
Aout + I ¯
Ain)−1
¯
Ain
−1 −I .
(44)
Thus, the class of DPPs is closed under most natural conditioning operations.
General marginals
These formulas also allow us to compute arbitrary marginals. For
example, applying Equation (15) to Equation (42) yields the marginal kernel for the
conditional DPP given the appearance of A:
KA = I −

(L + I ¯
A)−1
¯
A .
(45)
Thus we have
P(B ⊆Y |A ⊆Y ) = det(KA
B) .
(46)
(Note that KA is indexed by elements of Y −A, so this is only deﬁned when A and B are
disjoint.) Using Equation (27) for the complement of a DPP, we can now compute the
marginal probability of any partial assignment, i.e.,
P(A ⊆Y , B ∩Y = ∅) = P(A ⊆Y )P(B ∩Y = ∅|A ⊆Y )
(47)
= det(KA) det(I −KA
B) .
(48)
Computing conditional DPP kernels in general is asymptotically as expensive as the
dominant matrix inversion, although in some cases (conditioning only on non-appearance),
the inversion is not necessary. In any case, conditioning is at most a small constant factor
more expensive than marginalization.
2.4.4
Sampling
Algorithm 1, due to Hough et al. [2006], gives an eﬃcient algorithm for sampling a conﬁg-
uration Y from a DPP. The input to the algorithm is an eigendecomposition of the DPP
kernel L. Note that ei is the ith standard basis N-vector, which is all zeros except for a one
in the ith position. We will prove the following theorem.
Theorem 2.3. Let L = PN
n=1 λnvnv⊤
n be an orthonormal eigendecomposition of a positive
semideﬁnite matrix L. Then Algorithm 1 samples Y ∼PL.
15

Algorithm 1 Sampling from a DPP
Input: eigendecomposition {(vn, λn)}N
n=1 of L
J ←∅
for n = 1, 2, . . . , N do
J ←J ∪{n} with prob.
λn
λn+1
end for
V ←{vn}n∈J
Y ←∅
while |V | > 0 do
Select i from Y with Pr(i) =
1
|V |
P
v∈V (v⊤ei)2
Y ←Y ∪i
V ←V⊥, an orthonormal basis for the subspace of V orthogonal to ei
end while
Output: Y
Algorithm 1 has two main loops, corresponding to two phases of sampling. In the ﬁrst
phase, a subset of the eigenvectors is selected at random, where the probability of selecting
each eigenvector depends on its associated eigenvalue. In the second phase, a sample Y is
produced based on the selected vectors. Note that on each iteration of the second loop, the
cardinality of Y increases by one and the dimension of V is reduced by one. Since the initial
dimension of V is simply the number of selected eigenvectors (|J|), Theorem 2.3 has the
previously stated corollary that the cardinality of a random sample is distributed as a sum
of Bernoulli variables.
To prove Theorem 2.3 we will ﬁrst show that a DPP can be expressed as a mixture of
simpler, elementary DPPs. We will then show that the ﬁrst phase chooses an elementary
DPP according to its mixing coeﬃcient, while the second phase samples from the elementary
DPP chosen in phase one.
Deﬁnition 2.4. A DPP is called elementary if every eigenvalue of its marginal kernel is
in {0, 1}. We write PV , where V is a set of orthonormal vectors, to denote an elementary
DPP with marginal kernel KV = P
v∈V vv⊤.
We introduce the term “elementary” here; Hough et al. [2006] refer to elementary DPPs
as determinantal projection processes, since KV is an orthonormal projection matrix to
the subspace spanned by V . Note that, due to Equation (25), elementary DPPs are not
generally L-ensembles. We start with a technical lemma.
Lemma 2.5. Let Wn for n = 1, 2, . . . , N be an arbitrary sequence of k×k rank-one matrices,
and let (Wn)i denote the ith column of Wn. Let WJ = P
n∈J Wn. Then
det(WJ) =
X
n1,n2,...,nk∈J,
distinct
det([(Wn1)1(Wn2)2 . . . (Wnk)k]) .
(49)
Proof. Expanding on the ﬁrst column of WJ using the multilinearity of the determinant,
det(WJ) =
X
n∈J
det([(Wn)1(WJ)2 . . . (WJ)k]) ,
(50)
16

and, applying the same operation inductively to all columns,
det(WJ) =
X
n1,n2,...,nk∈J
det([(Wn1)1(Wn2)2 . . . (Wnk)k]) .
(51)
Since Wn has rank one, the determinant of any matrix containing two or more columns of
Wn is zero; thus the terms in the sum vanish unless n1, n2, . . . , nk are distinct.
Lemma 2.6. A DPP with kernel L = PN
n=1 λnvnv⊤
n is a mixture of elementary DPPs:
PL =
1
det(L + I)
X
J⊆{1,2,...,N}
PVJ Y
n∈J
λn ,
(52)
where VJ denotes the set {vn}n∈J.
Proof. Consider an arbitrary set A, with k = |A|. Let Wn = [vnv⊤
n ]A for n = 1, 2, . . . , N;
note that all of the Wn have rank one. From the deﬁnition of KVJ, the mixture distribution
on the right hand side of Equation (52) gives the following expression for the marginal
probability of A:
1
det(L + I)
X
J⊆{1,2,...,N}
det
 X
n∈J
Wn
! Y
n∈J
λn .
(53)
Applying Lemma 2.5, this is equal to
1
det(L + I)
X
J⊆{1,2,...,N}
X
n1,...,nk∈J,
distinct
det([(Wn1)1 . . . (Wnk)k])
Y
n∈J
λn
(54)
=
1
det(L + I)
N
X
n1,...,nk=1,
distinct
det([(Wn1)1 . . . (Wnk)k])
X
J⊇{n1,...,nk}
Y
n∈J
λn
(55)
=
1
det(L + I)
N
X
n1,...,nk=1,
distinct
det([(Wn1)1 . . . (Wnk)k])
λn1
λn1 + 1 · · ·
λnk
λnk + 1
N
Y
n=1
(λn + 1)
(56)
=
N
X
n1,...,nk=1,
distinct
det

λn1
λn1 + 1(Wn1)1 . . .
λnk
λnk + 1(Wnk)k

,
(57)
using the fact that det(L + I) = QN
n=1(λn + 1). Applying Lemma 2.5 in reverse and then
the deﬁnition of K in terms of the eigendecomposition of L, we have that the marginal
probability of A given by the mixture is
det
 N
X
n=1
λn
λn + 1Wn
!
= det(KA) .
(58)
Since the two distributions agree on all marginals, they are equal.
Next, we show that elementary DPPs have ﬁxed cardinality.
17

Lemma 2.7. If Y is drawn according to an elementary DPP PV , then |Y | = |V | with
probability one.
Proof. Since KV has rank |V |, PV (Y ⊆Y ) = 0 whenever |Y | > |V |, so |Y | ≤|V |. But we
also have
E [|Y |] = E
" N
X
n=1
I(n ∈Y )
#
(59)
=
N
X
n=1
E [I(n ∈Y )]
(60)
=
N
X
n=1
Knn = tr(K) = |V | .
(61)
Thus |Y | = |V | almost surely.
We can now prove the theorem.
Proof of Theorem 2.3. Lemma 2.6 says that the mixture weight of PVJ is given by the
product of the eigenvalues λn corresponding to the eigenvectors vn ∈VJ, normalized by
det(L + I) = QN
n=1(λn + 1). This shows that the ﬁrst loop of Algorithm 1 selects an
elementary DPP PV with probability equal to its mixture component. All that remains is
to show that the second loop samples Y ∼PV .
Let B represent the matrix whose rows are the eigenvectors in V , so that KV = B⊤B.
Using the geometric interpretation of determinants introduced in Section 2.2.1, det(KV
Y ) is
equal to the squared volume of the parallelepiped spanned by {Bi}i∈Y . Note that since V is
an orthonormal set, Bi is just the projection of ei onto the subspace spanned by V .
Let k = |V |. By Lemma 2.7 and symmetry, we can consider without loss of generality
a single Y = {1, 2, . . . , k}. Using the fact that any vector both in the span of V and
perpendicular to ei is also perpendicular to the projection of ei onto the span of V , by the
base × height formula for the volume of a parallelepiped we have
Vol ({Bi}i∈Y ) = ∥B1∥Vol

{Proj⊥e1Bi}k
i=2

,
(62)
where Proj⊥e1 is the projection operator onto the subspace orthogonal to e1. Proceeding
inductively,
Vol ({Bi}i∈Y ) = ∥B1∥∥Proj⊥e1B2∥· · · ∥Proj⊥e1,...,ek−1Bk∥.
(63)
Assume that, as iteration j of the second loop in Algorithm 1 begins, we have already
selected y1 = 1, y2 = 2, . . . , yj−1 = j −1. Then V in the algorithm has been updated to an
orthonormal basis for the subspace of the original V perpendicular to e1, . . . , ej−1, and the
probability of choosing yj = j is exactly
1
|V |
X
v∈V
(v⊤ej)2 =
1
k −j + 1∥Proj⊥e1,...,ej−1Bj∥2 .
(64)
18

Therefore, the probability of selecting the sequence 1, 2, . . . , k is
1
k!∥B1∥2∥Proj⊥e1B2∥2 · · · ∥Proj⊥e1,...,ek−1Bk∥2 = 1
k!Vol2 ({Bi}i∈Y ) .
(65)
Since volume is symmetric, the argument holds identically for all of the k! orderings of Y .
Thus the total probability that Algorithm 1 selects Y is det(KV
Y ).
Corollary 2.8. Algorithm 1 generates Y in uniformly random order.
Discussion
To get a feel for the sampling algorithm, it is useful to visualize the distributions
used to select i at each iteration, and to see how they are inﬂuenced by previously chosen
items. Figure 8a shows this progression for a simple DPP where Y is a ﬁnely sampled grid
of points in [0, 1], and the kernel is such that points are more similar the closer together
they are. Initially, the eigenvectors V give rise to a fairly uniform distribution over points
in Y, but as each successive point is selected and V is updated, the distribution shifts to
avoid points near those already chosen. Figure 8b shows a similar progression for a DPP
over points in the unit square.
The sampling algorithm also oﬀers an interesting analogy to clustering. If we think of
the eigenvectors of L as representing soft clusters, and the eigenvalues as representing their
strengths—the way we do for the eigenvectors and eigenvalues of the Laplacian matrix in
spectral clustering—then a DPP can be seen as performing a clustering of the elements in Y,
selecting a random subset of clusters based on their strength, and then choosing one element
per selected cluster. Of course, the elements are not chosen independently and cannot be
identiﬁed with speciﬁc clusters; instead, the second loop of Algorithm 1 coordinates the
choices in a particular way, accounting for overlap between the eigenvectors.
Algorithm 1 runs in time O(Nk3), where k = |V | is the number of eigenvectors selected in
phase one. The most expensive operation is the O(Nk2) Gram-Schmidt orthonormalization
required to compute V⊥. If k is large, this can be reasonably expensive, but for most
applications we do not want high-cardinality DPPs. (And if we want very high-cardinality
DPPs, we can potentially save time by using Equation (27) to sample the complement instead.)
In practice, the initial eigendecomposition of L is often the computational bottleneck,
requiring O(N3) time. Modern multi-core machines can compute eigendecompositions up
to N ≈1,000 at interactive speeds of a few seconds, or larger problems up to N ≈10,000
in around ten minutes. In some instances, it may be cheaper to compute only the top k
eigenvectors; since phase one tends to choose eigenvectors with large eigenvalues anyway,
this can be a reasonable approximation when the kernel is expected to be low rank. Note
that when multiple samples are desired, the eigendecomposition needs to be performed only
once.
Deshpande and Rademacher [2010] recently proposed a (1−ϵ)-approximate algorithm for
sampling that runs in time O(N2 log N k2
ϵ2 + N logω N k2ω+1
ϵ2ω
log(k
ϵ log N)) when L is already
decomposed as a Gram matrix, L = B⊤B. When B is known but an eigendecomposition is
not (and N is suﬃciently large), this may be signiﬁcantly faster than the exact algorithm.
19

0
1
0
10
20
x 10
−3
Position
Step 0
Probability
0
1
Position
Step 1
0
1
Position
Step 2
(a) Sampling points on an interval
Step 1
Step 2
Step 3
Step 4
Step 5
Step 6
Step 7
Step 8
(b) Sampling points in the plane
Figure 8: Sampling DPP over one-dimensional (top) and two-dimensional (bottom) particle
positions. Red circles indicate already selected positions. On the bottom, lighter color
corresponds to higher probability. The DPP naturally reduces the probabilities for positions
that are similar to those already selected.
20

2.4.5
Finding the mode
Finding the mode of a DPP—that is, ﬁnding the set Y ⊆Y that maximizes PL(Y )—is
NP-hard. In conditional models, this problem is sometimes referred to as maximum a
posteriori (or MAP) inference, and it is also NP-hard for most general structured models
such as Markov random ﬁelds. Hardness was ﬁrst shown for DPPs by Ko et al. [1995],
who studied the closely-related maximum entropy sampling problem: the entropy of a set
of jointly Gaussian random variables is given (up to constants) by the log-determinant
of their covariance matrix; thus ﬁnding the maximum entropy subset of those variables
requires ﬁnding the principal covariance submatrix with maximum determinant. Here, we
adapt the argument of C¸ivril and Magdon-Ismail [2009], who studied the problem of ﬁnding
maximum-volume submatrices.
Theorem 2.9. Let dpp-mode be the optimization problem of ﬁnding, for a positive semidef-
inite N × N input matrix L indexed by elements of Y, the maximum value of det(LY ) over
all Y ⊆Y. dpp-mode is NP-hard, and furthermore it is NP-hard even to approximate
dpp-mode to a factor of 8
9 + ϵ.
Proof. We reduce from exact 3-cover (X3C). An instance of X3C is a set S and a collection
C of three-element subsets of S; the problem is to decide whether there is a sub-collection
C′ ⊆C such that every element of S appears exactly once in C′ (that is, C′ is an exact
3-cover). X3C is known to be NP-complete.
The reduction is as follows. Let Y = {1, 2, . . . , |C|}, and let B be an |S| × |C| matrix
where Bsi =
1
√
3 if Ci contains s ∈S and zero otherwise. Deﬁne L = γB⊤B, where 1 < γ ≤9
8.
Note that the diagonal of L is constant and equal to γ, and an oﬀ-diagonal entry Lij is zero
if and only if Ci and Cj do not intersect. L is positive semideﬁnite by construction, and
the reduction requires only polynomial time. Let k = |S|
3 . We will show that the maximum
value of det(LY ) is greater than γk−1 if and only if C contains an exact 3-cover of S.
(←) If C′ ⊆C is an exact 3-cover of S, then it must contain exactly k 3-sets. Letting Y
be the set of indices in C′, we have LY = γI, and thus its determinant is γk > γk−1.
(→) Suppose there is no 3-cover of S in C. Let Y be an arbitrary subset of Y. If |Y | < k,
then
det(LY ) ≤
Y
i∈Y
Lii = γ|Y | ≤γk−1 .
(66)
Now suppose |Y | ≥k, and assume without loss of generality that Y = {1, 2, . . . , |Y |}. We
have LY = γB⊤
Y BY , and
det(LY ) = γ|Y |Vol2 ({Bi}i∈Y ) .
(67)
By the base × height formula,
Vol ({Bi}i∈Y ) = ∥B1∥∥Proj⊥B1B2∥· · · ∥Proj⊥B1,...,B|Y |−1B|Y |∥.
(68)
Note that, since the columns of B are normalized, each term in the product is at most
one. Furthermore, at least |Y | −k + 1 of the terms must be strictly less than one, because
otherwise there would be k orthogonal columns, which would correspond to a 3-cover. By
21

the construction of B, if two columns Bi and Bj are not orthogonal then Ci and Cj overlap
in at least one of three elements, so we have
∥Proj⊥BjBi∥= ∥Bi −(B⊤
i Bj)Bj∥
(69)
≤∥Bi −1
3Bj∥
(70)
≤
r
8
9 .
(71)
Therefore,
det(LY ) ≤γ|Y |
8
9
|Y |−k+1
(72)
≤γk−1 ,
(73)
since γ ≤9
8.
We have shown that the existence of a 3-cover implies that the optimal value of dpp-mode
is at least γk, while the optimal value cannot be more than γk−1 if there is no 3-cover. Thus
any algorithm that can approximate dpp-mode to better than a factor of 1
γ can be used to
solve X3C in polynomial time. We can choose γ = 9
8 to show that an approximation ratio of
8
9 + ϵ is NP-hard.
Since there are only |C| possible cardinalities for Y , Theorem 2.9 shows that dpp-mode
is NP-hard even under cardinality constraints.
[Ko et al., 1995] propose an exact, exponential branch-and-bound algorithm for ﬁnding
the mode using greedy heuristics to build candidate sets; they tested their algorithm on
problems up to N = 75, successfully ﬁnding optimal solutions in up to about an hour.
Modern computers are likely a few orders of magnitude faster; however, this algorithm is
still probably impractical for applications with large N. C¸ivril and Magdon-Ismail [2009]
propose an eﬃcient greedy algorithm for ﬁnding a set of size k, and prove that it achieves an
approximation ratio of O( 1
k!). While this guarantee is relatively poor for all but very small
k, in practice the results may be useful nonetheless.
Submodularity
PL is log-submodular; that is,
log PL(Y ∪{i}) −log PL(Y ) ≥log PL(Y ′ ∪{i}) −log PL(Y ′)
(74)
whenever Y ⊆Y ′ ⊆Y −{i}. Intuitively, adding elements to Y yields diminishing returns as
Y gets larger. (This is easy to show by a volume argument.) Submodular functions can be
minimized in polynomial time [Schrijver, 2000], and many results exist for approximately
maximizing monotone submodular functions, which have the special property that supersets
always have higher function values than their subsets [Nemhauser et al., 1978, Fisher et al.,
1978, Feige, 1998]. In Section 4.2.1 we will discuss how these kinds of greedy algorithms can
be adapted for DPPs. However, in general PL is highly non-monotone, since the addition of
even a single element can decrease the probability to zero.
Recently, Feige et al. [2007] showed that even non-monotone submodular functions can be
approximately maximized in polynomial time using a local search algorithm, and a growing
22

body of research has focused on extending this result in a variety of ways [Lee et al., 2009,
Gharan and Vondr´ak, 2011, Vondr´ak et al., 2011, Feldman et al., 2011a,b, Chekuri et al.,
2011]. In our recent work we showed how the computational structure of DPPs gives rise to
a particularly eﬃcient variant of these methods [Kulesza et al., 2012].
2.5
Related processes
Historically, a wide variety of point process models have been proposed and applied to
applications involving diverse subsets, particularly in settings where the items can be
seen as points in a physical space and diversity is taken to mean some sort of “spreading”
behavior. However, DPPs are essentially unique among this class in having eﬃcient and
exact algorithms for probabilistic inference, which is why they are particularly appealing
models for machine learning applications. In this section we brieﬂy survey the wider world
of point processes and discuss the computational properties of alternative models; we will
focus on point processes that lead to what is variously described as diversity, repulsion,
(over)dispersion, regularity, order, and inhibition.
2.5.1
Poisson point processes
Perhaps the most fundamental point process is the Poisson point process, which is depicted
on the right side of Figure 4 [Daley and Vere-Jones, 2003]. While deﬁned for continuous
Y, in the discrete setting the Poisson point process can be simulated by ﬂipping a coin
independently for each item, and including those items for which the coin comes up heads.
Formally,
P(Y = Y ) =
Y
i∈Y
pi
Y
i̸∈Y
(1 −pi) ,
(75)
where pi ∈[0, 1] is the bias of the ith coin. The process is called stationary when pi does
not depend on i; in a spatial setting this means that no region has higher density than any
other region.
A random set Y distributed as a Poisson point process has the property that whenever
A and B are disjoint subsets of Y, the random variables Y ∩A and Y ∩B are independent;
that is, the points in Y are not correlated. It is easy to see that DPPs generalize Poisson
point processes by choosing the marginal kernel K with Kii = pi and Kij = 0, i̸ = j. This
implies that inference for Poisson point processes is at least as eﬃcient as for DPPs; in fact,
it is more eﬃcient, since for instance it is easy to compute the most likely conﬁguration.
However, since Poisson point processes do not model correlations between variables, they
are rather uninteresting for most real-world applications.
Addressing this weakness, various procedural modiﬁcations of the Poisson process have
been proposed in order to introduce correlations between items. While such constructions
can be simple and intuitive, leading to straightforward sampling algorithms, they tend to
make general statistical inference diﬃcult.
Mat´ern repulsive processes
Mat´ern [1960, 1986] proposed a set of techniques for
thinning Poisson point processes in order to induce a type of repulsion when the items
are embedded in a Euclidean space. The Type I process is obtained from a Poisson set Y
23

by removing all items in Y that lie within some radius of another item in Y . That is, if
two items are close to each other, they are both removed; as a result all items in the ﬁnal
process are spaced at least a ﬁxed distance apart. The Type II Mat´ern repulsive process,
designed to achieve the same minimum distance property while keeping more items, begins
by independently assigning each item in Y a uniformly random “time” in [0, 1]. Then, any
item within a given radius of a point having a smaller time value is removed. Under this
construction, when two items are close to each other only the later one is removed. Still,
an item may be removed due to its proximity with an earlier item that was itself removed.
This leads to the Type III process, which proceeds dynamically, eliminating items in time
order whenever an earlier point which has not been removed lies within the radius.
Inference for the Mat´ern processes is computationally daunting. First and second order
moments can be computed for Types I and II, but in those cases computing the likelihood
of a set Y is seemingly intractable [Møller et al., 2010]. Recent work by Huber and Wolpert
[2009] shows that it is possible to compute likelihood for certain restricted Type III processes,
but computing moments cannot be done in closed form. In the general case, likelihood
for Type III processes must be estimated using an expensive Markov chain Monte Carlo
algorithm.
The Mat´ern processes are called “hard-core” because they strictly enforce a minimum
radius between selected items. While this property leads to one kind of diversity, it is
somewhat limited, and due to the procedural deﬁnition it is diﬃcult to characterize the side
eﬀects of the thinning process in a general way. Stoyan and Stoyan [1985] considered an
extension where the radius is itself chosen randomly, which may be more natural for certain
settings, but it does not alleviate the computational issues.
Random sequential adsorption
The Mat´ern repulsive processes are related in spirit
to the random sequential adsorption (RSA) model, which has been used in physics and
chemistry to model particles that bind to two-dimensional surfaces, e.g., proteins on a cell
membrane [Tanemura, 1979, Finegold and Donnell, 1979, Feder, 1980, Swendsen, 1981,
Hinrichsen et al., 1986, Ramsden, 1993]. RSA is described generatively as follows. Initially,
the surface is empty; iteratively, particles arrive and bind uniformly at random to a location
from among all locations that are not within a given radius of any previously bound particle.
When no such locations remain (the “jamming limit”), the process is complete.
Like the Mat´ern processes, RSA is a hard-core model, designed primarily to capture
packing distributions, with much of the theoretical analysis focused on the achievable density.
If the set of locations is further restricted at each step to those found in an initially selected
Poisson set Y , then it is equivalent to a Mat´ern Type III process [Huber and Wolpert, 2009];
it therefore shares the same computational burdens.
2.5.2
Gibbs and Markov point processes
While manipulating the Poisson process procedurally has some intuitive appeal, it seems
plausible that a more holistically-deﬁned process might be easier to work with, both
analytically and algorithmically.
The Gibbs point process provides such an approach,
oﬀering a general framework for incorporating correlations among selected items [Preston,
1976, Ripley and Kelly, 1977, Ripley, 1991, Van Lieshout, 2000, Møller and Waagepetersen,
24

2004, 2007, Daley and Vere-Jones, 2008]. The Gibbs probability of a set Y is given by
P(Y = Y ) ∝exp(−U(Y )) ,
(76)
where U is an energy function. Of course, this deﬁnition is fully general without further
constraints on U. A typical assumption is that U decomposes over subsets of items in Y ;
for instance
exp(−U(Y )) =
Y
A⊆Y,|A|≤k
ψ|A|(A)
(77)
for some small constant order k and potential functions ψ. In practice, the most common
case is k = 2, which is sometimes called a pairwise interaction point process [Diggle et al.,
1987]:
P(Y = Y ) ∝
Y
i∈Y
ψ1(i)
Y
i,j⊆Y
ψ2(i, j) .
(78)
In spatial settings, a Gibbs point process whose potential functions are identically 1 whenever
their input arguments do not lie within a ball of ﬁxed radius—that is, whose energy function
can be decomposed into only local terms—is called a Markov point process. A number of
speciﬁc Markov point processes have become well-known.
Pairwise Markov processes
Strauss [1975] introduced a simple pairwise Markov point
process for spatial data in which the potential function ψ2(i, j) is piecewise constant, taking
the value 1 whenever i and j are at least a ﬁxed radius apart, and the constant value γ
otherwise. When γ > 1, the resulting process prefers clustered items. (Note that γ > 1
is only possible in the discrete case; in the continuous setting the distribution becomes
non-integrable.) We are more interested in the case 0 < γ < 1, where conﬁgurations in
which selected items are near one another are discounted. When γ = 0, the resulting process
becomes hard-core, but in general the Strauss process is “soft-core”, preferring but not
requiring diversity.
The Strauss process is typical of pairwise Markov processes in that its potential function
ψ2(i, j) = ψ(|i −j|) depends only on the distance between its arguments. A variety of
alternative deﬁnitions for ψ(·) have been proposed [Ripley and Kelly, 1977, Ogata and
Tanemura, 1984]. For instance,
ψ(r) = 1 −exp(−(r/σ)2)
(79)
ψ(r) = exp(−(σ/r)n),
n > 2
(80)
ψ(r) = min(r/σ, 1)
(81)
where σ controls the degree of repulsion in each case. Each deﬁnition leads to a point process
with a slightly diﬀerent concept of diversity.
Area-interaction point processes
Baddeley and Van Lieshout [1995] proposed a non-
pairwise spatial Markov point process called the area-interaction model, where U(Y ) is
given by log γ times the total area contained in the union of discs of ﬁxed radius centered at
all of the items in Y . When γ > 1, we have log γ > 0 and the process prefers sets whose
25

discs cover as little area as possible, i.e., whose items are clustered. When 0 < γ < 1, log γ
becomes negative, so the process prefers “diverse” sets covering as much area as possible.
If none of the selected items fall within twice the disc radius of each other, then
exp(−U(Y )) can be decomposed into potential functions over single items, since the total
area is simply the sum of the individual discs. Similarly, if each disc intersects with at most
one other disc, the area-interaction process can be written as a pairwise interaction model.
However, in general, an unbounded number of items might appear in a given disc; as a result
the area-interaction process is an inﬁnite-order Gibbs process. Since items only interact
when they are near one another, however, local potential functions are suﬃcient and the
process is Markov.
Computational issues
Markov point processes have many intuitive properties. In fact, it
is not diﬃcult to see that, for discrete ground sets Y, the Markov point process is equivalent
to a Markov random ﬁeld (MRF) on binary variables corresponding to the elements of Y.
In Section 3.2.2 we will return to this equivalence in order to discuss the relative expressive
possibilities of DPPs and MRFs. For now, however, we simply observe that, as for MRFs
with negative correlations, repulsive Markov point processes are computationally intractable.
Even computing the normalizing constant for Equation (76) is NP-hard in the cases outlined
above [Daley and Vere-Jones, 2003, Møller and Waagepetersen, 2004].
On the other hand, quite a bit of attention has been paid to approximate inference
algorithms for Markov point processes, employing pseudolikelihood [Besag, 1977, Besag
et al., 1982, Jensen and Moller, 1991, Ripley, 1991], Markov chain Monte Carlo methods
[Ripley and Kelly, 1977, Besag and Green, 1993, H¨aggstr¨om et al., 1999, Berthelsen and
Møller, 2006], and other approximations [Ogata and Tanemura, 1985, Diggle et al., 1994].
Nonetheless, in general these methods are slow and/or inexact, and closed-form expressions
for moments and densities rarely exist [Møller and Waagepetersen, 2007]. In this sense the
DPP is unique.
2.5.3
Generalizations of determinants
The determinant of a k × k matrix K can be written as a polynomial of degree k in the
entries of K; in particular,
det(K) =
X
π
sgn(π)
k
Y
i=1
Ki,π(i) ,
(82)
where the sum is over all permutations π on 1, 2, . . . , k, and sgn is the permutation sign
function. In a DPP, of course, when K is (a submatrix of) the marginal kernel Equation (82)
gives the appearance probability of the k items indexing K. A natural question is whether
generalizations of this formula give rise to alternative point processes of interest.
Immanantal point processes
In fact, Equation (82) is a special case of the more general
matrix immanant, where the sgn function is replaced by χ, the irreducible representation-
theoretic character of the symmetric group on k items corresponding to a particular partition
of 1, 2, . . . , k. When the partition has k parts, that is, each element is in its own part,
26

χ(π) = sgn(π) and we recover the determinant. When the partition has a single part,
χ(π) = 1 and the result is the permanent of K. The associated permanental process was
ﬁrst described alongside DPPs by Macchi [1975], who referred to it as the “boson process.”
Bosons do not obey the Pauli exclusion principle, and the permanental process is in some
ways the opposite of a DPP, preferring sets of points that are more tightly clustered, or less
diverse, than if they were independent. Several recent papers have considered its properties
in some detail [Hough et al., 2006, McCullagh and Møller, 2006]. Furthermore, Diaconis
and Evans [2000] considered the point processes induced by general immanants, showing
that they are well deﬁned and in some sense “interpolate” between determinantal and
permanental processes.
Computationally, obtaining the permanent of a matrix is #P-complete [Valiant, 1979],
making the permanental process diﬃcult to work with in practice. Complexity results for
immanants are less deﬁnitive, with certain classes of immanants apparently hard to compute
[B¨urgisser, 2000, Brylinski and Brylinski, 2003], while some upper bounds on complexity
are known [Hartmann, 1985, Barvinok, 1990], and at least one non-trivial case is eﬃciently
computable [Grone and Merris, 1984]. It is not clear whether the latter result provides
enough leverage to perform inference beyond computing marginals.
α-determinantal point processes
An alternative generalization of Equation (82) is given
by the so-called α-determinant, where sgn(π) is replaced by αk−ν(π), with ν(π) counting the
number of cycles in π [Vere-Jones, 1997, Hough et al., 2006]. When α = −1 the determinant
is recovered, and when α = +1 we have again the permanent. Relatively little is known
for other values of α, although Shirai and Takahashi [2003a] conjecture that the associated
process exists when 0 ≤α ≤2 but not when α > 2. Whether α-determinantal processes
have useful properties for modeling or computational advantages remains an open question.
Hyperdeterminantal point processes
A third possible generalization of Equation (82)
is the hyperdeterminant originally proposed by Cayley [1843] and discussed in the context of
point processes by Evans and Gottlieb [2009]. Whereas the standard determinant operates
on a two-dimensional matrix with entries indexed by pairs of items, the hyperdeterminant
operates on higher-dimensional kernel matrices indexed by sets of items. The hyperdetermi-
nant potentially oﬀers additional modeling power, and Evans and Gottlieb [2009] show that
some useful properties of DPPs are preserved in this setting. However, so far relatively little
is known about these processes.
2.5.4
Quasirandom processes
Monte Carlo methods rely on draws of random points in order to approximate quantities of
interest; randomness guarantees that, regardless of the function being studied, the estimates
will be accurate in expectation and converge in the limit. However, in practice we get to
observe only a ﬁnite set of values drawn from the random source. If, by chance, this set
is “bad”, the resulting estimate may be poor. This concern has led to the development
of so-called quasirandom sets, which are in fact deterministically generated, but can be
substituted for random sets in some instances to obtain improved convergence guarantees
[Niederreiter, 1992, Sobol, 1998].
27

In contrast with pseudorandom generators, which attempt to mimic randomness by
satisfying statistical tests that ensure unpredictability, quasirandom sets are not designed to
appear random, and their elements are not (even approximately) independent. Instead, they
are designed to have low discrepancy; roughly speaking, low-discrepancy sets are “diverse” in
that they cover the sample space evenly. Consider a ﬁnite subset Y of [0, 1]D, with elements
x(i) = (x(i)
1 , x(i)
2 , . . . , x(i)
D ) for i = 1, 2, . . . , k. Let Sx = [0, x1) × [0, x2) × · · · × [0, xD) denote
the box deﬁned by the origin and the point x. The discrepancy of Y is deﬁned as follows.
disc(Y ) = max
x∈Y

|Y ∩Sx|
k
−Vol(Sx)
 .
(83)
That is, the discrepancy measures how the empirical density |Y ∩Sx|/k diﬀers from the
uniform density Vol(Sx) over the boxes Sx. Quasirandom sets with low discrepancy cover the
unit cube with more uniform density than do pseudorandom sets, analogously to Figure 4.
This deterministic uniformity property makes quasirandom sets useful for Monte Carlo
estimation via (among other results) the Koksma-Hlawka inequality [Hlawka, 1961, Nieder-
reiter, 1992]. For a function f with bounded variation V (f) on the unit cube, the inequality
states that

1
k
X
x∈Y
f(x) −
Z
[0,1]D f(x)dx
 ≤V (f)disc(Y ) .
(84)
Thus, low-discrepancy sets lead to accurate quasi-Monte Carlo estimates. In contrast to
typical Monte Carlo guarantees, the Koksma-Hlawka inequality is deterministic. Moreover,
since the rate of convergence for standard stochastic Monte Carlo methods is k−1/2, this
result is an (asymptotic) improvement when the discrepancy diminishes faster than k−1/2.
In fact, it is possible to construct quasirandom sequences where the discrepancy of the
ﬁrst k elements is O((log k)D/k); the ﬁrst such sequence was proposed by Halton [1960].
The Sobol sequence [Sobol, 1967], introduced later, oﬀers improved uniformity properties
and can be generated eﬃciently [Bratley and Fox, 1988].
It seems plausible that, due to their uniformity characteristics, low-discrepancy sets
could be used as computationally eﬃcient but non-probabilistic tools for working with
data exhibiting diversity. An algorithm generating quasirandom sets could be seen as an
eﬃcient prediction procedure if made to depend somehow on input data and a set of learned
parameters. However, to our knowledge no work has yet addressed this possibility.
3
Representation and algorithms
Determinantal point processes come with a deep and beautiful theory, and, as we have seen,
exactly characterize many theoretical processes. However, they are also promising models
for real-world data that exhibit diversity, and we are interested in making such applications
as intuitive, practical, and computationally eﬃcient as possible. In this section, we present a
variety of fundamental techniques and algorithms that serve these goals and form the basis
of the extensions we discuss later.
We begin by describing a decomposition of the DPP kernel that oﬀers an intuitive
tradeoﬀbetween a unary model of quality over the items in the ground set and a global
model of diversity.
The geometric intuitions from Section 2 extend naturally to this
28

decomposition. Splitting the model into quality and diversity components then allows us to
make a comparative study of expressiveness—that is, the range of distributions that the
model can describe. We compare the expressive powers of DPPs and negative-interaction
Markov random ﬁelds, showing that the two models are incomparable in general but exhibit
qualitatively similar characteristics, despite the computational advantages oﬀered by DPPs.
Next, we turn to the challenges imposed by large data sets, which are common in practice.
We ﬁrst address the case where N, the number of items in the ground set, is very large.
In this setting, the super-linear number of operations required for most DPP inference
algorithms can be prohibitively expensive. However, by introducing a dual representation of
a DPP we show that eﬃcient DPP inference remains possible when the kernel is low-rank.
When the kernel is not low-rank, we prove that a simple approximation based on random
projections dramatically speeds inference while guaranteeing that the deviation from the
original distribution is bounded. These techniques will be especially useful in Section 6,
when we consider exponentially large N.
Finally, we discuss some alternative formulas for the likelihood of a set Y in terms of the
marginal kernel K. Compared to the L-ensemble formula in Equation (13), these may be
analytically more convenient, since they do not involve ratios or arbitrary principal minors.
3.1
Quality vs. diversity
An important practical concern for modeling is interpretability; that is, practitioners should
be able to understand the parameters of the model in an intuitive way. While the entries of
the DPP kernel are not totally opaque in that they can be seen as measures of similarity—
reﬂecting our primary qualitative characterization of DPPs as diversifying processes—in most
practical situations we want diversity to be balanced against some underlying preferences
for diﬀerent items in Y. In this section, we propose a decomposition of the DPP that more
directly illustrates the tension between diversity and a per-item measure of quality.
In Section 2 we observed that the DPP kernel L can be written as a Gram matrix,
L = B⊤B, where the columns of B are vectors representing items in the set Y.
We
now take this one step further, writing each column Bi as the product of a quality term
qi ∈R+ and a vector of normalized diversity features φi ∈RD, ∥φi∥= 1. (While D = N is
suﬃcient to decompose any DPP, we keep D arbitrary since in practice we may wish to use
high-dimensional feature vectors.) The entries of the kernel can now be written as
Lij = qiφ⊤
i φjqj .
(85)
We can think of qi ∈R+ as measuring the intrinsic “goodness” of an item i, and φ⊤
i φj ∈[−1, 1]
as a signed measure of similarity between items i and j. We use the following shorthand for
similarity:
Sij ≡φ⊤
i φj =
Lij
p
LiiLjj
.
(86)
This decomposition of L has two main advantages. First, it implicitly enforces the
constraint that L must be positive semideﬁnite, which can potentially simplify learning (see
Section 4). Second, it allows us to independently model quality and diversity, and then
29

(a)
(b)
(c)
Figure 9: Revisiting DPP geometry: (a) The probability of a subset Y is the square of the
volume spanned by qiφi for i ∈Y . (b) As item i’s quality qi increases, so do the probabilities
of sets containing item i. (c) As two items i and j become more similar, φ⊤
i φj increases and
the probabilities of sets containing both i and j decrease.
combine them into a uniﬁed model. In particular, we have:
PL(Y ) ∝
 Y
i∈Y
q2
i
!
det(SY ) ,
(87)
where the ﬁrst term increases with the quality of the selected items, and the second term
increases with the diversity of the selected items. We will refer to q as the quality model and
S or φ as the diversity model. Without the diversity model, we would choose high-quality
items, but we would tend to choose similar high-quality items over and over. Without
the quality model, we would get a very diverse set, but we might fail to include the most
important items in Y, focusing instead on low-quality outliers. By combining the two models
we can achieve a more balanced result.
Returning to the geometric intuitions from Section 2.2.1, the determinant of LY is equal
to the squared volume of the parallelepiped spanned by the vectors qiφi for i ∈Y . The
magnitude of the vector representing item i is qi, and its direction is φi. Figure 9 (reproduced
from the previous section) now makes clear how DPPs decomposed in this way naturally
balance the two objectives of high quality and high diversity. Going forward, we will nearly
always assume that our models are decomposed into quality and diversity components. This
provides us not only with a natural and intuitive setup for real-world applications, but also
a useful perspective for comparing DPPs with existing models, which we turn to next.
3.2
Expressive power
Many probabilistic models are known and widely used within the machine learning community.
A natural question, therefore, is what advantages DPPs oﬀer that standard models do
not.
We have seen already how a large variety of inference tasks, like sampling and
30

conditioning, can be performed eﬃciently for DPPs; however eﬃciency is essentially a
prerequisite for any practical model. What makes DPPs particularly unique is the marriage
of these computational advantages with the ability to express global, negative interactions
between modeling variables; this repulsive domain is notoriously intractable using traditional
approaches like graphical models [Murphy et al., 1999, Boros and Hammer, 2002, Ishikawa,
2003, Taskar et al., 2004, Yanover and Weiss, 2002, Yanover et al., 2006, Kulesza and Pereira,
2008]. In this section we elaborate on the expressive powers of DPPs and compare them
with those of Markov random ﬁelds, which we take as representative graphical models.
3.2.1
Markov random ﬁelds
A Markov random ﬁeld (MRF) is an undirected graphical model deﬁned by a graph G whose
nodes 1, 2, . . . , N represent random variables. For our purposes, we will consider binary
MRFs, where each output variable takes a value from {0, 1}. We use yi to denote a value of
the ith output variable, bold yc to denote an assignment to a set of variables c, and y for
an assignment to all of the output variables. The graph edges E encode direct dependence
relationships between variables; for example, there might be edges between similar elements
i and j to represent the fact that they tend not to co-occur. MRFs are often referred to
as conditional random ﬁelds when they are parameterized to depend on input data, and
especially when G is a chain [Laﬀerty et al., 2001].
An MRF deﬁnes a joint probability distribution over the output variables that factorizes
across the cliques C of G:
P(y) = 1
Z
Y
c∈C
ψc(yc) .
(88)
Here each ψc is a potential function that assigns a nonnegative value to every possible
assignment yc of the clique c, and Z is the normalization constant P
y′
Q
c∈C ψc(y′
c). Note
that, for a binary MRF, we can think of y as the characteristic vector for a subset Y of
Y = {1, 2, . . . , N}. Then the MRF is equivalently the distribution of a random subset Y ,
where P(Y = Y ) is equivalent to P(y).
The Hammersley-Cliﬀord theorem states that P(y) deﬁned in Equation (88) is always
Markov with respect to G; that is, each variable is conditionally independent of all other
variables given its neighbors in G. The converse also holds: any distribution that is Markov
with respect to G, as long as it is strictly positive, can be decomposed over the cliques of G as
in Equation (88) [Grimmett, 1973]. MRFs therefore oﬀer an intuitive way to model problem
structure. Given domain knowledge about the nature of the ways in which outputs interact,
a practitioner can construct a graph that encodes a precise set of conditional independence
relations. (Because the number of unique assignments to a clique c is exponential in |c|,
computational constraints generally limit us to small cliques.)
For comparison with DPPs, we will focus on pairwise MRFs, where the largest cliques
with interesting potential functions are the edges; that is, ψc(yc) = 1 for all cliques c where
|c| > 2. The pairwise distribution is
P(y) = 1
Z
N
Y
i=1
ψi(yi)
Y
ij∈E
ψij(yi, yj) .
(89)
31

We refer to ψi(yi) as node potentials, and ψij(yi, yj) as edge potentials.
MRFs are very general models—in fact, if the cliques are unbounded in size, they are
fully general—but inference is only tractable in certain special cases. Cooper [1990] showed
that general probabilistic inference (conditioning and marginalization) in MRFs is NP-hard,
and this was later extended by Dagum and Luby [1993], who showed that inference is
NP-hard even to approximate. Shimony [1994] proved that the MAP inference problem
(ﬁnding the mode of an MRF) is also NP-hard, and Abdelbar and Hedetniemi [1998] showed
that the MAP problem is likewise hard to approximate. In contrast, we showed in Section 2
that DPPs oﬀer eﬃcient exact probabilistic inference; furthermore, although the MAP
problem for DPPs is NP-hard, it can be approximated to a constant factor under cardinality
constraints in polynomial time.
The ﬁrst tractable subclass of MRFs was identiﬁed by Pearl [1982], who showed that
belief propagation can be used to perform inference in polynomial time when G is a tree.
More recently, certain types of inference in binary MRFs with associative (or submodular)
potentials ψ have been shown to be tractable [Boros and Hammer, 2002, Taskar et al., 2004,
Kolmogorov and Zabih, 2004]. Inference in non-binary associative MRFs is NP-hard, but
can be eﬃciently approximated to a constant factor depending on the size of the largest
clique [Taskar et al., 2004]. Intuitively, an edge potential is called associative if it encourages
the endpoint nodes take the same value (e.g., to be both in or both out of the set Y ). More
formally, associative potentials are at least one whenever the variables they depend on are
all equal, and exactly one otherwise.
We can rewrite the pairwise, binary MRF of Equation (89) in a canonical log-linear form:
P(y) ∝exp

X
i
wiyi +
X
ij∈E
wijyiyj

.
(90)
Here we have eliminated redundancies by forcing ψi(0) = 1, ψij(0, 0) = ψij(0, 1) = ψij(1, 0) =
1, and setting wi = log ψi(1), wij = log ψij(1, 1). This parameterization is sometimes called
the fully visible Boltzmann machine. Under this representation, the MRF is associative
whenever wij ≥0 for all ij ∈E.
We have seen that inference in MRFs is tractable when we restrict the graph to a
tree or require the potentials to encourage agreement. However, the repulsive potentials
necessary to build MRFs exhibiting diversity are the opposite of associative potentials (since
they imply wij < 0), and lead to intractable inference for general graphs. Indeed, such
negative potentials can create “frustrated cycles”, which have been used both as illustrations
of common MRF inference algorithm failures [Kulesza and Pereira, 2008] and as targets
for improving those algorithms [Sontag and Jaakkola, 2007]. A wide array of (informally)
approximate inference algorithms have been proposed to mitigate tractability problems, but
none to our knowledge eﬀectively and reliably handles the case where potentials exhibit
strong repulsion.
3.2.2
Comparing DPPs and MRFs
Despite the computational issues outlined in the previous section, MRFs are popular models
and, importantly, intuitive for practitioners, both because they are familiar and because
32

their potential functions directly model simple, local relationships. We argue that DPPs
have a similarly intuitive interpretation using the decomposition in Section 3.1. Here, we
compare the distributions realizable by DPPs and MRFs to see whether the tractability of
DPPs comes at a large expressive cost.
Consider a DPP over Y = {1, 2, . . . , N} with N × N kernel matrix L decomposed as in
Section 3.1; we have
PL(Y ) ∝det(LY ) =
 Y
i∈Y
q2
i
!
det(SY ) .
(91)
The most closely related MRF is a pairwise, complete graph on N binary nodes with negative
interaction terms. We let yi = I(i ∈Y ) be indicator variables for the set Y , and write the
MRF in the log-linear form of Equation (90):
PMRF(Y ) ∝exp

X
i
wiyi +
X
i<j
wijyiyj

,
(92)
where wij ≤0.
Both of these models can capture negative correlations between indicator variables yi.
Both models also have N(N+1)
2
parameters: the DPP has quality scores qi and similarity
measures Sij, and the MRF has node log-potentials wi and edge log-potentials wij. The key
representational diﬀerence is that, while wij are individually constrained to be nonpositive,
the positive semideﬁnite constraint on the DPP kernel is global. One consequence is that,
as a side eﬀect, the MRF can actually capture certain limited positive correlations; for
example, a 3-node MRF with w12, w13 < 0 and w23 = 0 induces a positive correlation
between nodes two and three by virtue of their mutual disagreement with node one. As
we have seen in Section 2, the semideﬁnite constraint prevents the DPP from forming any
positive correlations.
More generally, semideﬁniteness means that the DPP diversity feature vectors must
satisfy the triangle inequality, leading to
p
1 −Sij +
p
1 −Sjk ≥
p
1 −Sik
(93)
for all i, j, k ∈Y since ∥φi −φj∥∝
p
1 −Sij. The similarity measure therefore obeys a type
of transitivity, with large Sij and Sjk implying large Sik.
Equation (93) is not, by itself, suﬃcient to guarantee that L is positive semideﬁnite,
since S must also be realizable using unit length feature vectors. However, rather than
trying to develop further intuition algebraically, we turn to visualization. While it is diﬃcult
to depict the feasible distributions of DPPs and MRFs in high dimensions, we can get a feel
for their diﬀerences even with a small number of elements N.
When N = 2, it is easy to show that the two models are equivalent, in the sense that
they can both represent any distribution with negative correlations:
P(y1 = 1)P(y2 = 1) ≥P(y1 = 1, y2 = 1) .
(94)
When N = 3, diﬀerences start to become apparent. In this setting both models have
six parameters: for the DPP they are (q1, q2, q3, S12, S13, S23), and for the MRF they are
33

y1
y2
y3
ψ3
ψ2
ψ1
ψ123
Figure 10: A factor graph representation of a 3-item MRF or DPP.
Y
y1y2y3
ψMRF
123
ψDPP
123
{}
000
1
1
{1}
100
1
1
{2}
010
1
1
{3}
001
1
1
{1,2}
110
ew12
1 −S2
12
{1,3}
101
ew13
1 −S2
13
{2,3}
011
ew23
1 −S2
23
{1,2,3}
111
ew12+w13+w23
1 + 2S12S13S23 −S2
12 −S2
13 −S2
23
Table 1: Values of ternary factors for 3-item MRFs and DPPs.
(w1, w2, w3, w12, w13, w23). To place the two models on equal footing, we represent each
as the product of unnormalized per-item potentials ψ1, ψ2, ψ3 and a single unnormalized
ternary potential ψ123. This representation corresponds to a factor graph with three nodes
and a single, ternary factor (see Figure 10). The probability of a set Y is then given by
P(Y ) ∝ψ1(y1)ψ2(y2)ψ3(y3)ψ123(y1, y2, y3) .
(95)
For the DPP, the node potentials are ψDPP
i
(yi) = q2yi
i
, and for the MRF they are ψMRF
i
(yi) =
ewiyi. The ternary factors are
ψDPP
123 (y1, y2, y3) = det(SY ) ,
(96)
ψMRF
123 (y1, y2, y3) = exp

X
i<j
wijyiyj

.
(97)
Since both models allow setting the node potentials arbitrarily, we focus now on the
ternary factor. Table 1 shows the values of ψDPP
123
and ψMRF
123
for all subsets Y ⊆Y. The
last four entries are determined, respectively, by the three edge parameters of the MRF and
three similarity parameters Sij of the DPP, so the sets of realizable ternary factors form 3-D
manifolds in 4-D space. We attempt to visualize these manifolds by showing 2-D slices in
3-D space for various values of ψ123(1, 1, 1) (the last row of Table 1).
Figure 11a depicts four such slices of the realizable DPP distributions, and Figure 11b
shows the same slices of the realizable MRF distributions. Points closer to the origin (on
34

the lower left) correspond to “more repulsive” distributions, where the three elements of
Y are less likely to appear together. When ψ123(1, 1, 1) is large (gray surfaces), negative
correlations are weak and the two models give rise to qualitatively similar distributions. As
the value of the ψ123(1, 1, 1) shrinks to zero (red surfaces), the two models become quite
diﬀerent. MRFs, for example, can describe distributions where the ﬁrst item is strongly
anti-correlated with both of the others, but the second and third are not anti-correlated
with each other. The transitive nature of the DPP makes this impossible.
To improve visibility, we have constrained S12, S13, S23 ≥0 in Figure 11a. Figure 11c
shows a single slice without this constraint; allowing negative similarity makes it possible
to achieve strong three-way repulsion with less pairwise repulsion, closing the surface away
from the origin. The corresponding MRF slice is shown in Figure 11d, and the two are
overlaid in Figure 11e and Figure 11f. Even though there are relatively strong interactions
in these plots (ψ123(1, 1, 1) = 0.1), the models remain roughly comparable in terms of the
distributions they can express.
As N gets larger, we conjecture that the story is essentially the same. DPPs are primarily
constrained by a notion of transitivity on the similarity measure; thus it would be diﬃcult
to use a DPP to model, for example, data where items repel “distant” items rather than
similar items—if i is far from j and j is far from k we cannot necessarily conclude that i is
far from k. One way of looking at this is that repulsion of distant items induces positive
correlations between the selected items, which a DPP cannot represent.
MRFs, on the other hand, are constrained by their local nature and do not eﬀectively
model data that are “globally” diverse. For instance, a pairwise MRF we cannot exclude a
set of three or more items without excluding some pair of those items. More generally, an
MRF assumes that repulsion does not depend on (too much) context, so it cannot express
that, say, there can be only a certain number of selected items overall. The DPP can
naturally implement this kind of restriction though the rank of the kernel.
3.3
Dual representation
The standard inference algorithms for DPPs rely on manipulating the kernel L through
inversion, eigendecomposition, and so on. However, in situations where N is large we may
not be able to work eﬃciently with L—in some cases we may not even have the memory
to write it down. In this section, instead, we develop a dual representation of a DPP that
shares many important properties with the kernel L but is often much smaller. Afterwards,
we will show how this dual representation can be applied to perform eﬃcient inference.
Let B be the D × N matrix whose columns are given by Bi = qiφi, so that L = B⊤B.
Consider now the matrix
C = BB⊤.
(98)
By construction, C is symmetric and positive semideﬁnite. In contrast to L, which is too
expensive to work with when N is large, C is only D × D, where D is the dimension of the
diversity feature function φ. In many practical situations, D is ﬁxed by the model designer,
while N may grow without bound as new items become available; for instance, a search
engine may continually add to its database of links. Furthermore, we have the following
result.
35

0
1
0
1
0
1
(101)
(110)
(011)
(a) DPP slices (partial)
0
1
0
1
0
1
(101)
(110)
(011)
(b) MRF slices
0
1
0
1
0
1
(101)
(110)
(011)
(c) DPP slice (full) for ψ123(1, 1, 1) = 0.1
0
1
0
1
0
1
(101)
(110)
(011)
(d) MRF slice for ψ123(1, 1, 1) = 0.1
0
1
0
1
0
1
(110)
(101)
(011)
(e) Overlay
0
1
0
1
0
1
(110)
(101)
(011)
(f) Overlay (rotated)
Figure 11: (a,b) Realizable values of ψ123(1, 1, 0), ψ123(1, 0, 1), and ψ123(0, 1, 1) in a 3-factor
when ψ123(1, 1, 1) = 0.001 (red), 0.25 (green), 0.5 (blue), and 0.75 (grey). (c,d) Surfaces
for ψ123(1, 1, 1) = 0.1, allowing negative similarity for the DPP. (e,f) DPP (blue) and MRF
(red) surfaces superimposed.
36

Proposition 3.1. The nonzero eigenvalues of C and L are identical, and the corresponding
eigenvectors are related by the matrix B. That is,
C =
D
X
n=1
λnˆvnˆv⊤
n
(99)
is an eigendecomposition of C if and only if
L =
D
X
n=1
λn

1
√λn
B⊤ˆvn
 
1
√λn
B⊤ˆvn
⊤
(100)
is an eigendecomposition of L.
Proof. In the forward direction, we assume that {(λn, ˆvn)}D
n=1 is an eigendecomposition of
C. We have
D
X
n=1
λn

1
√λn
B⊤ˆvn
 
1
√λn
B⊤ˆvn
⊤
= B⊤
 D
X
n=1
ˆvnˆv⊤
n
!
B
(101)
= B⊤B = L ,
(102)
since ˆvn are orthonormal by assumption. Furthermore, for any n we have

1
√λn
B⊤ˆvn

2
= 1
λn
(B⊤ˆvn)⊤(B⊤ˆvn)
(103)
= 1
λn
ˆv⊤
n Cˆvn
(104)
= 1
λn
λn∥ˆvn∥
(105)
= 1 ,
(106)
using the fact that Cˆvn = λnˆvn since ˆvn is an eigenvector of C. Finally, for any distinct
1 ≤a, b ≤D, we have
 1
√λa
B⊤ˆva
⊤ 1
√λb
B⊤ˆvb

=
1
√λaλb
ˆv⊤
a Cˆvb
(107)
=
√λb
√λa
ˆv⊤
a ˆvb
(108)
= 0 .
(109)
Thus
n
λn,
1
√λn B⊤ˆvn
oD
n=1 is an eigendecomposition of L. In the other direction, an
analogous argument applies once we observe that, since L = B⊤B, L has rank at most D
and therefore at most D nonzero eigenvalues.
Proposition 3.1 shows that C contains quite a bit of information about L. In fact, C is
suﬃcient to perform nearly all forms of DPP inference eﬃciently, including normalization
and marginalization in constant time with respect to N, and sampling in time linear in N.
37

3.3.1
Normalization
Recall that the normalization constant for a DPP is given by det(L + I). If λ1, λ2, . . . , λN
are the eigenvalues of L, then the normalization constant is equal to QN
n=1(λn + 1), since
the determinant is the product of the eigenvalues of its argument. By Proposition 3.1, the
nonzero eigenvalues of L are also the eigenvalues of the dual representation C. Thus, we
have
det(L + I) =
D
Y
n=1
(λn + 1) = det(C + I) .
(110)
Computing the determinant of C + I requires O(Dω) time.
3.3.2
Marginalization
Standard DPP marginalization makes use of the marginal kernel K, which is of course as
large as L. However, the dual representation C can be used to compute the entries of K. We
ﬁrst eigendecompose the dual representation as C = PD
n=1 λnˆvnˆv⊤
n , which requires O(Dω)
time. Then, we can use the deﬁnition of K in terms of the eigendecomposition of L as well
as Proposition 3.1 to compute
Kii =
D
X
n=1
λn
λn + 1

1
√λn
B⊤
i ˆvn
2
(111)
= q2
i
D
X
n=1
1
λn + 1(φ⊤
i ˆvn)2 .
(112)
That is, the diagonal entries of K are computable from the dot products between the diversity
features φi and the eigenvectors of C; we can therefore compute the marginal probability of
a single item i ∈Y from an eigendecomposition of C in O(D2) time. Similarly, given two
items i and j we have
Kij =
D
X
n=1
λn
λn + 1

1
√λn
B⊤
i ˆvn
 
1
√λn
B⊤
j ˆvn

(113)
= qiqj
D
X
n=1
1
λn + 1(φ⊤
i ˆvn)(φ⊤
j ˆvn) ,
(114)
so we can compute arbitrary entries of K in O(D2) time. This allows us to compute, for
example, pairwise marginals P(i, j ∈Y ) = KiiKjj −K2
ij. More generally, for a set A ∈Y,
|A| = k, we need to compute k(k+1)
2
entries of K to obtain KA, and taking the determinant
then yields P(A ⊆Y ). The process requires only O(D2k2 + kω) time; for small sets |A| this
is just quadratic in the dimension of φ.
3.3.3
Sampling
Recall the DPP sampling algorithm, which is reproduced for convenience in Algorithm 2.
We will show that this algorithm can be implemented in a tractable manner by using the
38

Algorithm 2 Sampling from a DPP
Input: eigendecomposition {(vn, λn)}N
n=1 of L
J ←∅
for n = 1, 2, . . . , N do
J ←J ∪{n} with prob.
λn
λn+1
end for
V ←{vn}n∈J
Y ←∅
while |V | > 0 do
Select i from Y with Pr(i) =
1
|V |
P
v∈V (v⊤ei)2
Y ←Y ∪i
V ←V⊥, an orthonormal basis for the subspace of V orthogonal to ei
end while
Output: Y
dual representation C. The main idea is to represent V , the orthonormal set of vectors in
RN, as a set ˆV of vectors in RD, with the mapping
V =
n
B⊤ˆv | ˆv ∈ˆV
o
.
(115)
Note that, when ˆV contains eigenvectors of C, this is (up to scale) the relationship established
by Proposition 3.1 between eigenvectors ˆv of C and eigenvectors v of L.
The mapping in Equation (115) has several useful properties.
If v1 = B⊤ˆv1 and
v2 = B⊤ˆv2, then v1 + v2 = B⊤(ˆv1 + ˆv2), and likewise for any arbitrary linear combination.
In other words, we can perform implicit scaling and addition of the vectors in V using only
their preimages in ˆV . Additionally, we have
v⊤
1 v2 = (B⊤ˆv1)⊤(B⊤ˆv2)
(116)
= ˆv⊤
1 Cˆv2 ,
(117)
so we can compute dot products of vectors in V in O(D2) time. This means that, for
instance, we can implicitly normalize v = B⊤ˆv by updating ˆv ←
ˆv
√
ˆv⊤Cˆv.
We now show how these operations allow us to eﬃciently implement key parts of the
sampling algorithm. Because the nonzero eigenvalues of L and C are equal, the ﬁrst loop of
the algorithm, where we choose in index set J, remains unchanged. Rather than using J to
construct orthonormal V directly, however, we instead build the set ˆV by adding
ˆvn
√
ˆv⊤
n Cˆvn
for every n ∈J.
In the last phase of the loop, we need to ﬁnd an orthonormal basis V⊥for the subspace
of V orthogonal to a given ei. This requires two steps. In the ﬁrst, we subtract a multiple
of one of the vectors in V from all of the other vectors so that they are zero in the ith
component, leaving us with a set of vectors spanning the subspace of V orthogonal to ei. In
order to do this we must be able to compute the ith component of a vector v ∈V ; since
v = B⊤ˆv, this is easily done by computing the ith column of B, and then taking the dot
product with ˆv. This takes only O(D) time. In the second step, we use the Gram-Schmidt
39

Algorithm 3 Sampling from a DPP (dual representation)
Input: eigendecomposition {(ˆvn, λn)}N
n=1 of C
J ←∅
for n = 1, 2, . . . , N do
J ←J ∪{n} with prob.
λn
λn+1
end for
ˆV ←
n
ˆvn
√
ˆv⊤
n Cˆvn
o
n∈J
Y ←∅
while | ˆV | > 0 do
Select i from Y with Pr(i) =
1
| ˆV |
P
ˆv∈ˆV (ˆv⊤Bi)2
Y ←Y ∪i
Let ˆv0 be a vector in ˆV with B⊤
i ˆv0̸ = 0
Update ˆV ←
n
ˆv −ˆv⊤Bi
ˆv⊤
0 Bi ˆv0 | ˆv ∈ˆV −{ˆv0}
o
Orthonormalize ˆV with respect to the dot product ⟨ˆv1, ˆv2⟩= ˆv⊤
1 Cˆv2
end while
Output: Y
process to convert the resulting vectors into an orthonormal set. This requires a series of
dot products, sums, and scalings of vectors in V ; however, as previously argued all of these
operations can be performed implicitly. Therefore the mapping in Equation (115) allows us
to implement the ﬁnal line of the second loop using only tractable computations on vectors
in ˆV .
All that remains, then, is to eﬃciently choose an item i according to the distribution
Pr(i) =
1
|V |
X
v∈V
(v⊤ei)2
(118)
=
1
| ˆV |
X
ˆv∈ˆV
((B⊤ˆv)⊤ei)2
(119)
in the ﬁrst line of the while loop. Simplifying, we have
Pr(i) =
1
| ˆV |
X
ˆv∈ˆV
(ˆv⊤Bi)2 .
(120)
Thus the required distribution can be computed in time O(NDk), where k = | ˆV |. The
complete dual sampling algorithm is given in Algorithm 3; the overall runtime is O(NDk2 +
D2k3).
3.4
Random projections
As we have seen, dual DPPs allow us to deal with settings where N is too large to work
eﬃciently with L by shifting the computational focus to the dual kernel C, which is only
D × D. This is an eﬀective approach when D ≪N. Of course, in some cases D might also
40

be unmanageably large, for instance when the diversity features are given by word counts in
natural language settings, or high-resolution image features in vision.
To address this problem, we describe a method for reducing the dimension of the diversity
features while maintaining a close approximation to the original DPP model. Our approach
is based on applying random projections, an extremely simple technique that nonetheless
provides an array of theoretical guarantees, particularly with respect to preserving distances
between points [Vempala, 2004]. A classic result of Johnson and Lindenstrauss [1984], for
instance, shows that high-dimensional points can be randomly projected onto a logarithmic
number of dimensions while approximately preserving the distances between them. More
recently, Magen and Zouzias [2008] extended this idea to the preservation of volumes spanned
by sets of points. Here, we apply the connection between DPPs and spanned volumes to
show that random projections allow us to reduce the dimensionality of φ, dramatically
speeding up inference, while maintaining a provably close approximation to the original,
high-dimensional model. We begin by stating a variant of Magen and Zouzias’ result.
Lemma 3.2. (Adapted from Magen and Zouzias [2008]) Let X be a D × N matrix. Fix
k < N and 0 < ϵ, δ < 1/2, and set the projection dimension
d = max
2k
ϵ , 24
ϵ2
log(3/δ)
log N
+ 1

(log N + 1) + k −1

.
(121)
Let G be a d × D random projection matrix whose entries are independently sampled from
N(0, 1
d), and let XY , where Y ⊆{1, 2, . . . , N}, denote the D × |Y | matrix formed by taking
the columns of X corresponding to indices in Y . Then with probability at least 1 −δ we
have, for all Y with cardinality at most k:
(1 −ϵ)|Y | ≤Vol(GXY )
Vol(XY ) ≤(1 + ϵ)|Y | ,
(122)
where Vol(XY ) is the k-dimensional volume of the parallelepiped spanned by the columns of
XY .
Lemma 3.2 says that, with high probability, randomly projecting to
d = O(max{k/ϵ, (log(1/δ) + log N)/ϵ2})
(123)
dimensions is suﬃcient to approximately preserve all volumes spanned by k columns of X.
We can use this result to bound the eﬀectiveness of random projections for DPPs.
In order to obtain a result that is independent of D, we will restrict ourselves to the
portion of the distribution pertaining to subsets Y with cardinality at most a constant k.
This restriction is intuitively reasonable for any application where we use DPPs to model
sets of relatively small size compared to N, which is common in practice. However, formally
it may seem a bit strange, since it implies conditioning the DPP on cardinality. In Section 5
we will show that this kind of conditioning is actually very practical and eﬃcient, and
Theorem 3.3, which we prove shortly, will apply directly to the k-DPPs of Section 5 without
any additional work.
41

For now, we will seek to approximate the distribution P≤k(Y ) = P(Y = Y | |Y | ≤k),
which is simply the original DPP conditioned on the cardinality of the modeled subset:
P≤k(Y ) =
 Q
i∈Y q2
i

det(φ(Y )⊤φ(Y ))
P
|Y ′|≤k
 Q
i∈Y q2
i

det(φ(Y )⊤φ(Y )) ,
(124)
where φ(Y ) denotes the D × |Y | matrix formed from columns φi for i ∈Y . Our main result
follows.
Theorem 3.3. Let P≤k(Y ) be the cardinality-conditioned DPP distribution deﬁned by quality
model q and D-dimensional diversity feature function φ, and let
˜P≤k(Y ) ∝
 Y
i∈Y
q2
i
!
det([Gφ(Y )]⊤[Gφ(Y )])
(125)
be the cardinality-conditioned DPP distribution obtained by projecting φ with G. Then for
projection dimension d as in Equation (121), we have
∥P≤k −˜P≤k∥1 ≤e6kϵ −1
(126)
with probability at least 1 −δ. Note that e6kϵ −1 ≈6kϵ when kϵ is small.
The theorem says that for d logarithmic in N and linear in k, the L1 variational distance
between the original DPP and the randomly projected version is bounded. In order to use
Lemma 3.2, which bounds volumes of parallelepipeds, to prove this bound on determinants,
we will make use of the following relationship:
Vol(XY ) =
q
det(X⊤
Y XY ) .
(127)
In order to handle the conditional DPP normalization constant
X
|Y |≤k
 Y
i∈Y
q2
i
!
det(φ(Y )⊤φ(Y )) ,
(128)
we also must adapt Lemma 3.2 to sums of determinants. Finally, for technical reasons we
will change the symmetry of the upper and lower bounds from the sign of ϵ to the sign of
the exponent. The following lemma gives the details.
Lemma 3.4. Under the deﬁnitions and assumptions of Lemma 3.2, we have, with probability
at least 1 −δ,
(1 + 2ϵ)−2k ≤
P
|Y |≤k det((GXY )⊤(GXY ))
P
|Y |≤k det(X⊤
Y XY )
≤(1 + ϵ)2k .
(129)
42

Proof.
X
|Y |≤k
det((GXY )⊤(GXY )) =
X
|Y |≤k
Vol2(GXY )
(130)
≥
X
|Y |≤k

Vol(XY )(1 −ϵ)|Y |2
(131)
≥(1 −ϵ)2k X
|Y |≤k
Vol2(XY )
(132)
≥(1 + 2ϵ)−2k X
|Y |≤k
det(X⊤
Y XY ) ,
(133)
where the ﬁrst inequality holds with probability at least 1 −δ by Lemma 3.2, and the third
follows from the fact that (1 −ϵ)(1 + 2ϵ) ≥1 (since ϵ < 1/2), thus (1 −ϵ)2k ≥(1 + 2ϵ)−2k.
The upper bound follows directly:
X
|Y |≤k
(Vol(GXY ))2 ≤
X
|Y |≤k

Vol(XY )(1 + ϵ)|Y |2
(134)
≤(1 + ϵ)2k X
|Y |≤k
det(X⊤
Y XY ) .
(135)
We can now prove Theorem 3.3.
Proof of Theorem 3.3. Recall the matrix B, whose columns are given by Bi = qiφi. We
have
∥P ≤k −˜P ≤k∥1 =
X
|Y |≤k
|P ≤k(Y ) −˜P ≤k(Y )|
(136)
=
X
|Y |≤k
P ≤k(Y )
1 −
˜P ≤k(Y )
P ≤k(Y )

(137)
=
X
|Y |≤k
P ≤k(Y )
1 −det([GB⊤
Y ][GBY ])
det(B⊤
Y BY )
P
|Y ′|≤k det(B⊤
Y ′BY ′)
P
|Y ′|≤k det([GB⊤
Y ′][GBY ′])

≤
1 −(1 + ϵ)2k(1 + 2ϵ)2k
X
|Y |≤k
P ≤k(Y )
(138)
≤e6kϵ −1 ,
(139)
where the ﬁrst inequality follows from Lemma 3.2 and Lemma 3.4, which hold simultaneously
with probability at least 1 −δ, and the second follows from (1 + a)b ≤eab for a, b ≥0.
By combining the dual representation with random projections, we can deal simultane-
ously with very large N and very large D. In fact, in Section 6 we will show that N can
even be exponentially large if certain structural assumptions are met. These techniques
vastly expand the range of problems to which DPPs can be practically applied.
43

3.5
Alternative likelihood formulas
Recall that, in an L-ensemble DPP, the likelihood of a particular set Y ⊆Y is given by
PL(Y ) =
det(LY )
det(L + I) .
(140)
This expression has some nice intuitive properties in terms of volumes, and, ignoring the
normalization in the denominator, takes a simple and concise form. However, as a ratio of
determinants on matrices of diﬀering dimension, it may not always be analytically convenient.
Minors can be diﬃcult to reason about directly, and ratios complicate calculations like
derivatives.
Moreover, we might want the likelihood in terms of the marginal kernel
K = L(L + I)−1 = I −(L + I)−1, but simply plugging in these identities yields a expression
that is somewhat unwieldy.
As alternatives, we will derive some additional formulas that, depending on context, may
have useful advantages. Our starting point will be the observation, used previously in the
proof of Theorem 2.2, that minors can be written in terms of full matrices and diagonal
indicator matrices; speciﬁcally, for positive semideﬁnite L,
det(LY ) = det(IY L + I ¯Y )
(141)
= (−1)| ¯Y | det(IY L −I ¯Y )
(142)
= |det(IY L −I ¯Y )| ,
(143)
where IY is the diagonal matrix with ones in the diagonal positions corresponding to elements
of Y and zeros everywhere else, and ¯Y = Y −Y . These identities can be easily shown
by examining the matrices blockwise under the partition Y = Y ∪¯Y , as in the proof of
Theorem 2.2.
Applying Equation (141) to Equation (140), we get
PL(Y ) = det(IY L + I ¯Y )
det(L + I)
(144)
= det((IY L + I ¯Y )(L + I)−1)
(145)
= det(IY L(L + I)−1 + I ¯Y (L + I)−1) .
(146)
Already, this expression, which is a single determinant of an N × N matrix, is in some ways
easier to work with. We can also more easily write the likelihood in terms of K:
PL(Y ) = det(IY K + I ¯Y (I −K)) .
(147)
Recall from Equation (27) that I −K is the marginal kernel of the complement DPP; thus,
in an informal sense we can read Equation (147) as combining the marginal probability that
Y is selected with the marginal probability that ¯Y is not selected.
44

We can also make a similar derivation using Equation (142):
PL(Y ) = (−1)| ¯Y | det(IY L −I ¯Y )
det(L + I)
(148)
= (−1)| ¯Y | det((IY L −I ¯Y )(L + I)−1)
(149)
= (−1)| ¯Y | det(IY L(L + I)−1 −I ¯Y (L + I)−1)
(150)
= (−1)| ¯Y | det(IY K −I ¯Y (I −K))
(151)
= (−1)| ¯Y | det(K −I ¯Y )
(152)
= |det(K −I ¯Y )| .
(153)
Note that Equation (147) involves asymmetric matrix products, but Equation (153) does
not; on the other hand, K −I ¯Y is (in general) indeﬁnite.
4
Learning
We have seen that determinantal point process oﬀer appealing modeling intuitions and
practical algorithms, capturing geometric notions of diversity and permitting computationally
eﬃcient inference in a variety of settings. However, to accurately model real-world data
we must ﬁrst somehow determine appropriate values of the model parameters. While an
expert could conceivably design an appropriate DPP kernel from prior knowledge, in general,
especially when dealing with large data sets, we would like to have an automated method
for learning a DPP.
We ﬁrst discuss how to parameterize DPPs conditioned on input data. We then deﬁne
what we mean by learning, and, using the quality vs. diversity decomposition introduced in
Section 3.1, we show how a parameterized quality model can be learned eﬃciently from a
training set.
4.1
Conditional DPPs
Suppose we want to use a DPP to model the seats in an auditorium chosen by students
attending a class. (Perhaps we think students tend to spread out.) In this context each
meeting of the class is a new sample from the empirical distribution over subsets of the
(ﬁxed) seats, so we merely need to collect enough samples and we should be able to ﬁt our
model, as desired.
For many problems, however, the notion of a single ﬁxed base set Y is inadequate. For
instance, consider extractive document summarization, where the goal is to choose a subset
of the sentences in a news article that together form a good summary of the entire article.
In this setting Y is the set of sentences in the news article being summarized, thus Y is not
ﬁxed in advance but instead depends on context. One way to deal with this problem is to
model the summary for each article as its own DPP with a separate kernel matrix. This
approach certainly aﬀords great ﬂexibility, but if we have only a single sample summary for
each article, there is little hope of getting good parameter estimates. Even more importantly,
we have learned nothing that can be applied to generate summaries of unseen articles at
test time, which was presumably our goal in the ﬁrst place.
45

Alternatively, we could let Y be the set of all sentences appearing in any news article; this
allows us to learn a single model for all of our data, but comes with obvious computational
issues and does not address the other concerns, since sentences are rarely repeated.
To solve this problem, we need a DPP that depends parametrically on the input data;
this will enable us to share information across training examples in a justiﬁable and eﬀective
way. We ﬁrst introduce some notation. Let X be the input space; for example, X might be
the space of news articles. Let Y(X) denote the ground set of items implied by an input
X ∈X, e.g., the set of all sentences in news article X. We have the following deﬁnition.
Deﬁnition 4.1. A conditional DPP P(Y = Y |X) is a conditional probabilistic model
which assigns a probability to every possible subset Y ⊆Y(X). The model takes the form of
an L-ensemble:
P(Y = Y |X) ∝det(LY (X)) ,
(154)
where L(X) is a positive semideﬁnite |Y(X)| × |Y(X)| kernel matrix that depends on the
input.
As discussed in Section 2, the normalization constant for a conditional DPP can be
computed eﬃciently and is given by det(L(X)+I). Using the quality/diversity decomposition
introduced in Section 3.1, we have
Lij(X) = qi(X)φi(X)⊤φj(X)qj(X)
(155)
for suitable qi(X) ∈R+ and φi(X) ∈RD, ∥φi(X)∥= 1, which now depend on X.
In the following sections we will discuss application-speciﬁc parameterizations of the
quality and diversity models q and φ in terms of the input. First, however, we review our
learning setup.
4.1.1
Supervised learning
The basic supervised learning problem is as follows. We receive a training data sample
{(X(t), Y (t))}T
t=1 drawn independently and identically from a distribution D over pairs
(X, Y ) ∈X × 2Y(X), where X is an input space and Y(X) is the associated ground set for
input X. We assume that the conditional DPP kernel L(X; θ) is parameterized in terms of
a generic θ, and let
Pθ(Y |X) =
det(LY (X; θ))
det(L(X; θ) + I)
(156)
denote the conditional probability of an output Y given input X under parameter θ. The
goal of learning is to choose appropriate θ based on the training sample so that we can make
accurate predictions on unseen inputs.
While there are a variety of objective functions commonly used for learning, here we will
focus on maximum likelihood learning (or maximum likelihood estimation, often abbreviated
MLE), where the goal is to choose θ to maximize the conditional log-likelihood of the
46

observed data:
L(θ) = log
T
Y
t=1
Pθ(Y (t)|X(t))
(157)
=
T
X
t=1
log Pθ(Y (t)|X(t))
(158)
=
T
X
t=1
h
log det(LY (t)(X(t); θ)) −log det(L(X(t); θ) + I)
i
.
(159)
Optimizing L is consistent under mild assumptions; that is, if the training data are actually
drawn from a conditional DPP with parameter θ∗, then the learned θ →θ∗as T →∞.
Of course real data are unlikely to exactly follow any particular model, but in any case
the maximum likelihood approach has the advantage of calibrating the DPP to produce
reasonable probability estimates, since maximizing L can be seen as minimizing the log-loss
on the training data.
To optimize the log-likelihood, we will use standard algorithms such as gradient ascent
or L-BFGS [Nocedal, 1980]. These algorithms depend on the gradient ∇L(θ), which must
exist and be computable, and they converge to the optimum whenever L(θ) is concave in θ.
Thus, our ability to optimize likelihood eﬃciently will depend fundamentally on these two
properties.
4.2
Learning quality
We begin by showing how to learn a parameterized quality model qi(X; θ) when the diversity
feature function φi(X) is held ﬁxed [Kulesza and Taskar, 2011b]. This setup is somewhat
analogous to support vector machines [Vapnik, 2000], where a kernel is ﬁxed by the practi-
tioner and then the per-example weights are automatically learned. Here, φi(X) can consist
of any desired measurements (and could even be inﬁnite-dimensional, as long as the resulting
similarity matrix S is a proper kernel). We propose computing the quality scores using a
log-linear model:
qi(X; θ) = exp
1
2θ⊤f i(X)

,
(160)
where f i(X) ∈Rm is a feature vector for item i and the parameter θ is now concretely an
element of Rm. Note that feature vectors f i(X) are in general distinct from φi(X); the
former are used for modeling quality, and will be “interpreted” by the parameters θ, while
the latter deﬁne the diversity model S, which is ﬁxed in advance. We have
Pθ(Y |X) =
Q
i∈Y

exp
 θ⊤f i(X)

det(SY (X))
P
Y ′⊆Y(X)
Q
i∈Y ′ [exp (θ⊤f i(X))] det(SY ′(X)) .
(161)
For ease of notation, going forward we will assume that the training set contains only a
single instance (X, Y ), and drop the instance index t. All of the following results extend
easily to multiple training examples. First, we show that under this parameterization the
log-likelihood function is concave in θ; then we will show that its gradient can be computed
47

eﬃciently. With these results in hand we will be able to apply standard optimization
techniques.
Proposition 4.2. L(θ) is concave in θ.
Proof. We have
L(θ) = log Pθ(Y |X)
(162)
= θ⊤X
i∈Y
f i(X) + log det(SY (X))
−log
X
Y ′⊆Y(X)
exp
 
θ⊤X
i∈Y ′
f i(X)
!
det(SY ′(X)) .
(163)
With respect to θ, the ﬁrst term is linear, the second is constant, and the third is the
composition of a concave function (negative log-sum-exp) and an aﬃne function, so the
overall expression is concave.
We now derive the gradient ∇L(θ), using Equation (163) as a starting point.
∇L(θ) =
X
i∈Y
f i(X) −∇

log
X
Y ′⊆Y(X)
exp
 
θ⊤X
i∈Y ′
f i(X)
!
det(SY ′(X))


(164)
=
X
i∈Y
f i(X) −
X
Y ′⊆Y(X)
exp
 θ⊤P
i∈Y ′ f i(X)

det(SY ′(X)) P
i∈Y ′ f i(X)
P
Y ′ exp
 θ⊤P
i∈Y ′ f i(X)

det(SY ′(X))
(165)
=
X
i∈Y
f i(X) −
X
Y ′⊆Y(X)
Pθ(Y ′|X)
X
i∈Y ′
f i(X) .
(166)
Thus, as in standard maximum entropy modeling, the gradient of the log-likelihood can be
seen as the diﬀerence between the empirical feature counts and the expected feature counts
under the model distribution. The diﬀerence here, of course, is that Pθ is a DPP, which
assigns higher probability to diverse sets. Compared with a standard independent model
obtained by removing the diversity term from Pθ, Equation (166) actually emphasizes those
training examples that are not diverse, since these are the examples on which the quality
model must focus its attention in order to overcome the bias imposed by the determinant.
In the experiments that follow we will see that this distinction is important in practice.
The sum over Y ′ in Equation (166) is exponential in |Y(X)|; hence we cannot compute
it directly. Instead, we can rewrite it by switching the order of summation:
X
Y ′⊆Y(X)
Pθ(Y ′|X)
X
i∈Y ′
f i(X) =
X
i
f i(X)
X
Y ′⊇{i}
Pθ(Y ′|X) .
(167)
Note that P
Y ′⊇{i} Pθ(Y ′|X) is the marginal probability of item i appearing in a set sampled
from the conditional DPP. That is, the expected feature counts are computable directly from
the marginal probabilities. Recall that we can eﬃciently marginalize DPPs; in particular,
per-item marginal probabilities are given by the diagonal of K(X; θ), the marginal kernel
48

Algorithm 4 Gradient of the log-likelihood
Input: instance (X, Y ), parameters θ
Compute L(X; θ) as in Equation (155)
Eigendecompose L(X; θ) = PN
n=1 λnvnv⊤
n
for i ∈Y(X) do
Kii ←PN
n=1
λn
λn+1v2
ni
end for
∇L(θ) ←P
i∈Y f i(X) −P
i Kiif i(X)
Output: gradient ∇L(θ)
(which now depends on the input and the parameters). We can compute K(X; θ) from the
kernel L(X; θ) using matrix inversion or eigendecomposition. Algorithm 4 shows how we
can use these ideas to compute the gradient of L(θ) eﬃciently.
In fact, note that we do not need all of K(X; θ), but only its diagonal. In Algorithm 4 we
exploit this in the main loop, using only O(N2) multiplications rather than the O(N3) we
would need to construct the entire marginal kernel. (In the dual representation, this can be
improved further to O(ND) multiplications.) Unfortunately, these savings are asymptotically
irrelevant since we still need to eigendecompose L(X; θ), requiring about O(N3) time (or
O(D3) time for the corresponding eigendecomposition in the dual). It is conceivable that a
faster algorithm exists for computing the diagonal of K(X; θ) directly, along the lines of
ideas recently proposed by Tang and Saad [2011] (which focus on sparse matrices); however,
we are not currently aware of a useful improvement over Algorithm 4.
4.2.1
Experiments: document summarization
We demonstrate learning for the conditional DPP quality model on an extractive multi-
document summarization task using news text. The basic goal is to generate a short piece of
text that summarizes the most important information from a news story. In the extractive
setting, the summary is constructed by stringing together sentences found in a cluster of
relevant news articles. This selection problem is a balancing act: on the one hand, each
selected sentence should be relevant, sharing signiﬁcant information with the cluster as a
whole; on the other, the selected sentences should be diverse as a group so that the summary
is not repetitive and is as informative as possible given its length [Dang, 2005, Nenkova
et al., 2006]. DPPs are a natural ﬁt for this task, viewed through the decomposition of
Section 3.1 [Kulesza and Taskar, 2011b].
As in Section 4.1, the input X will be a cluster of documents, and Y(X) a set of candidate
sentences from those documents. In our experiments Y(X) contains all sentences from all
articles in the cluster, although in general preprocessing could also be used to try to improve
the candidate set [Conroy et al., 2004]. We will learn a DPP to model good summaries Y for
a given input X. Because DPPs model unordered sets while summaries are linear text, we
construct a written summary from Y by placing the sentences it contains in the same order
in which they appeared in the original documents. This policy is unlikely to give optimal
results, but it is consistent with prior work [Lin and Bilmes, 2010] and seems to perform well.
Furthermore, it is at least partially justiﬁed by the fact that modern automatic summary
49

NASA and the Russian Space Agency have agreed to set 
aside a last-minute Russian request to launch an 
international space station into an orbit closer to Mir, 
oﬃcials announced Friday. . . .
A last-minute alarm forced NASA to halt Thursday's 
launching of the space shuttle Endeavour, on a mission to 
start assembling the international space station. This was 
the ﬁrst time in three years . . .
The planet's most daring construction job began Friday as 
the shuttle Endeavour carried into orbit six astronauts and 
the ﬁrst U.S.-built part of an international space station 
that is expected to cost more than $100 billion. . . .
Following a series of intricate maneuvers and the skillful 
use of the space shuttle Endeavour's robot arm, 
astronauts on Sunday joined the ﬁrst two of many 
segments that will form the space station . . .
document cluster
human summary
extractive summary
On Friday the shuttle Endeavor carried six astronauts into orbit to start 
building an international space station.  The launch occurred after Russia 
and U.S. oﬃcials agreed not to delay the ﬂight in order to orbit closer to 
MIR, and after a last-minute alarm forced a postponement.  On Sunday 
astronauts joining the Russian-made Zarya control module cylinder with 
the American-made module to form a 70,000 pounds mass 77 feet 
long. . . .
...
• NASA and the Russian Space Agency have agreed to set aside . . .
• A last-minute alarm forced NASA to halt Thursday's launching . . .
• This was the ﬁrst time in three years, and 19 ﬂights . . .
• After a last-minute alarm, the launch went oﬀ ﬂawlessly Friday . . . 
• Following a series of intricate maneuvers and the skillful . . .
• It looked to be a perfect and, hopefully, long-lasting ﬁt. . . .
Figure 12: A sample cluster from the DUC 2004 test set, with one of the four human
reference summaries and an (artiﬁcial) extractive summary.
evaluation metrics like ROUGE, which we describe later, are mostly invariant to sentence
order.
We experiment with data from the multi-document summarization task (Task 2) of
the 2003 and 2004 Document Understanding Conference (DUC) [Dang, 2005]. The article
clusters used for these tasks are taken from the NIST TDT collection. Each cluster contains
approximately 10 articles drawn from the AP and New York Times newswires, and covers a
single topic over a short time span. The clusters have a mean length of approximately 250
sentences and 5800 words. The 2003 task, which we use for training, contains 30 clusters,
and the 2004 task, which is our test set, contains 50 clusters. Each cluster comes with four
reference human summaries (which are not necessarily formed by sentences from the original
articles) for evaluation purposes. Summaries are required to be at most 665 characters in
length, including spaces. Figure 12 depicts a sample cluster from the test set.
To measure performance on this task we follow the original evaluation and use ROUGE,
an automatic evaluation metric for summarization [Lin, 2004]. ROUGE measures n-gram
overlap statistics between the human references and the summary being scored, and combines
them to produce various sub-metrics. ROUGE-1, for example, is a simple unigram recall
measure that has been shown to correlate quite well with human judgments [Lin, 2004].
Here, we use ROUGE’s unigram F-measure (which combines ROUGE-1 with a measure of
precision) as our primary metric for development. We refer to this measure as ROUGE-1F.
We also report ROUGE-1P and ROUGE-1R (precision and recall, respectively) as well as
ROUGE-2F and ROUGE-SU4F, which include bigram match statistics and have also been
shown to correlate well with human judgments. Our implementation uses ROUGE version
1.5.5 with stemming turned on, but without stopword removal. These settings correspond
to those used for the actual DUC competitions [Dang, 2005]; however, we use a more recent
version of ROUGE.
50

Algorithm 5 Constructing extractive training data
Input: article cluster X, human reference word counts H, character limit b
U ←Y(X)
Y ←∅
while U̸ = ∅do
i ←arg maxi′∈U

ROUGE-1F(words(i′),H)
√
length(i′)

Y ←Y ∪{i}
H ←max(H −words(i), 0)
U ←U −({i} ∪{i′|length(Y ) + length(i′) > b})
end while
Output: extractive oracle summary Y
System
ROUGE-1F
ROUGE-2F
ROUGE-SU4F
Machine
35.17
9.15
12.47
Oracle
46.59
16.18
19.52
Human
56.22
33.37
36.50
Table 2: ROUGE scores for the best automatic system from DUC 2003, our heuristically-
generated oracle extractive summaries, and human summaries.
Training data
Recall that our learning setup requires a training sample of pairs (X, Y ),
where Y ⊆Y(X). Unfortunately, while the human reference summaries provided with the
DUC data are of high quality, they are not extractive, thus they do not serve as examples of
summaries that we can actually model. To obtain high-quality extractive “oracle” summaries
from the human summaries, we employ a simple greedy algorithm (Algorithm 5). On each
round the sentence that achieves maximal unigram F-measure to the human references,
normalized by length, is selected and added to the extractive summary. Since high F-measure
requires high precision as well as recall, we then update the references by removing the
words “covered” by the newly selected sentence, and proceed to the next round.
We can measure the success of this approach by calculating ROUGE scores of our oracle
summaries with respect to the human summaries. Table 2 shows the results for the DUC
2003 training set. For reference, the table also includes the ROUGE scores of the best
automatic system from the DUC competition in 2003 (“machine”), as well as the human
references themselves (“human”). Note that, in the latter case, the human summary being
evaluated is also one of the four references used to compute ROUGE; hence the scores are
probably signiﬁcantly higher than a human could achieve in practice. Furthermore, it has
been shown that extractive summaries, even when generated optimally, are by nature limited
in quality compared with unconstrained summaries [Genest et al., 2010]. Thus we believe
that the oracle summaries make strong targets for training.
Features
We next describe the feature functions that we use for this task. For diversity
features φi(X), we generate standard normalized tf-idf vectors. We tokenize the input test,
51

remove stop words and punctuation, and apply a Porter stemmer.2 Then, for each word
w, the term frequency tfi(w) of w in sentence i is deﬁned as the number of times the word
appears in the sentence, and the inverse document frequency idf(w) is the negative logarithm
of the fraction of articles in the training set where w appears. A large value of idf(w) implies
that w is relatively rare. Finally, the vector φi(X) has one element per word, and the value
of the entry associated with word w is proportional to tfi(w)idf(w). The scale of φi(X) is
set such that ∥φi(X)∥= 1.
Under this deﬁnition of φ, the similarity Sij between sentences i and j is known as their
cosine similarity:
Sij =
P
w tfi(w)tfj(w)idf2(w)
qP
w tf2
i (w)idf2(w)
qP
w tf2
j(w)idf2(w)
∈[0, 1] .
(168)
Two sentences are cosine similar if they contain many of the same words, particularly words
that are uncommon (and thus more likely to be salient).
We augment φi(X) with an additional constant feature taking the value ρ ≥0, which is
a hyperparameter. This has the eﬀect of making all sentences more similar to one another,
increasing repulsion. We set ρ to optimize ROUGE-1F score on the training set; in our
experiments, the best choice was ρ = 0.7.
We use the very standard cosine distance as our similarity metric because we need
to be conﬁdent that it is sensible; it will remain ﬁxed throughout the experiments. On
the other hand, weights for the quality features are learned, so we can use a variety of
intuitive measures and rely on training to ﬁnd an appropriate combination. The quality
features we use are listed below. For some of the features, we make use of cosine distances;
these are computed using the same tf-idf vectors as the diversity features. When a feature
is intrinsically real-valued, we produce a series of binary features by binning. The bin
boundaries are determined either globally or locally. Global bins are evenly spaced quantiles
of the feature values across all sentences in the training set, while local bins are quantiles of
the feature values in the current cluster only.
• Constant: A constant feature allows the model to bias towards summaries with a
greater or smaller number of sentences.
• Length: We bin the length of the sentence (in characters) into ﬁve global bins.
• Document position: We compute the position of the sentence in its original document
and generate binary features indicating positions 1–5, plus a sixth binary feature
indicating all other positions. We expect that, for newswire text, sentences that appear
earlier in an article are more likely to be useful for summarization.
• Mean cluster similarity: For each sentence we compute the average cosine distance
to all other sentences in the cluster. This feature attempts to measure how well the
sentence reﬂects the salient words occurring most frequently in the cluster. We use
the raw score, ﬁve global bins, and ten local bins.
2Code for this preprocessing pipeline was provided by Hui Lin and JeﬀBilmes.
52

Algorithm 6 Approximately computing the MAP summary
Input: document cluster X, parameter θ, character limit b
U ←Y(X)
Y ←∅
while U̸ = ∅do
i ←arg maxi′∈U

Pθ(Y ∪{i}|X)−Pθ(Y |X)
length(i)

Y ←Y ∪{i}
U ←U −({i} ∪{i′|length(Y ) + length(i′) > b})
end while
Output: summary Y
• LexRank: We compute continuous LexRank scores by ﬁnding the principal eigenvector
of the row-normalized cosine similarity matrix. (See Erkan and Radev [2004] for details.)
This provides an alternative measure of centrality. We use the raw score, ﬁve global
bins, and ﬁve local bins.
• Personal pronouns: We count the number of personal pronouns (“he”, “her”,
“themselves”, etc.) appearing in each sentence. Sentences with many pronouns may be
poor for summarization since they omit important entity names.
In total we have 40 quality features; including ρ our model has 41 parameters.
Inference
At test time, we need to take the learned parameters θ and use them to predict
a summary Y for a previously unseen document cluster X. One option is to sample from
the conditional distribution, which can be done exactly and eﬃciently, as described in
Section 2.4.4. However, sampling occasionally produces low-probability predictions. We
obtain better performance on this task by applying two alternative inference techniques.
Greedy MAP approximation. One common approach to prediction in probabilistic models
is maximum a posteriori (MAP) decoding, which selects the highest probability conﬁguration.
For practical reasons, and because the primary metrics for evaluation were recall-based,
the DUC evaluations imposed a length limit of 665 characters, including spaces, on all
summaries. In order to compare with prior work we also apply this limit in our tests. Thus,
our goal is to ﬁnd the most likely summary, subject to a budget constraint:
Y MAP = arg max
Y
Pθ(Y |X)
s.t.
X
i∈Y
length(i) ≤b ,
(169)
where length(i) is the number of characters in sentence i, and b = 665 is the limit on the total
length. As discussed in Section 2.4.5, computing Y MAP exactly is NP-hard, but, recalling
that the optimization in Equation (169) is submodular, we can approximate it through a
simple greedy algorithm (Algorithm 6).
Algorithm 6 is closely related to those given by Krause and Guestrin [2005] and especially
Lin and Bilmes [2010]. As discussed in Section 2.4.5, algorithms of this type have formal
53

System
Time (s)
dpp-greedy
0.15
dpp-mbr100
1.30
dpp-mbr1000
16.91
dpp-mbr5000
196.86
Table 3: The average time required to produce a summary for a single cluster from the DUC
2004 test set (without parallelization).
approximation guarantees for monotone submodular problems. Our MAP problem is not
generally monotone; nonetheless, Algorithm 6 seems to work well in practice, and is very
fast (see Table 3).
Minimum Bayes risk decoding. The second inference technique we consider is minimum
Bayes risk (MBR) decoding. First proposed by Goel and Byrne [2000] for automatic speech
recognition, MBR decoding has also been used successfully for word alignment and machine
translation [Kumar and Byrne, 2002, 2004]. The idea is to choose a prediction that minimizes
a particular application-speciﬁc loss function under uncertainty about the evaluation target.
In our setting we use ROUGE-1F as a (negative) loss function, so we have
Y MBR = arg max
Y
E [ROUGE-1F(Y, Y ∗)] ,
(170)
where the expectation is over realizations of Y ∗, the true summary against which we are
evaluated. Of course, the distribution of Y ∗is unknown, but we can assume that our
trained model Pθ(·|X) gives a reasonable approximation. Since there are exponentially many
possible summaries, we cannot expect to perform an exact search for Y MBR; however, we
can approximate it through sampling, which is eﬃcient.
Combining these approximations, we have the following inference rule:
˜Y MBR =
arg max
Y r′, r′∈{1,2,...,R}
1
R
R
X
r=1
ROUGE-1F(Y r′, Y r) ,
(171)
where Y 1, Y 2, . . . , Y R are samples drawn from Pθ(·|X).
In order to satisfy the length
constraint imposed by the evaluation, we consider only samples with length between 660
and 680 characters (rejecting those that fall outside this range), and crop ˜Y MBR to the limit
of 665 bytes if necessary. The choice of R is a tradeoﬀbetween fast running time and quality
of inference. In the following section, we report results for R = 100, 1000, and 5000; Table 3
shows the average time required to produce a summary under each setting. Note that MBR
decoding is easily parallelizable, but the results in Table 3 are for a single processor. Since
MBR decoding is randomized, we report all results averaged over 100 trials.
Results
We train our model with a standard L-BFGS optimization algorithm. We place a
zero-mean Gaussian prior on the parameters θ, with variance set to optimize ROUGE-1F on
a development subset of the 2003 data. We learn parameters θ on the DUC 2003 corpus, and
test them using DUC 2004 data. We generate predictions from the trained DPP using the
54

two inference algorithms described in the previous section, and compare their performance
to a variety of baseline systems.
Our ﬁrst and simplest baseline merely returns the ﬁrst 665 bytes of the cluster text.
Since the clusters consist of news articles, this is not an entirely unreasonable summary in
many cases. We refer to this baseline as begin.
We also compare against an alternative DPP-based model with identical similarity
measure and quality features, but where the quality model has been trained using standard
logistic regression. To learn this baseline, each sentence is treated as a unique instance to be
classiﬁed as included or not included, with labels derived from our training oracle. Thus,
it has the advantages of a DPP at test time, but does not take into account the diversity
model while training; comparing to this baseline allows us to isolate the contribution of
learning the model parameters in context. Note that MBR inference is impractical for this
model because its training does not properly calibrate for overall summary length, so nearly
all samples are either too long or too short. Thus, we report only the results obtained from
greedy inference. We refer to this model as lr+dpp.
Next, we employ as baselines a range of previously proposed methods for multi-document
summarization. Perhaps the simplest and most popular is Maximum Marginal Relevance
(MMR), which uses a greedy selection process [Carbonell and Goldstein, 1998]. MMR
relies on a similarity measure between sentences, for which we use the cosine distance
measure S, and a measure of relevance for each sentence, for which we use the same logistic
regression-trained quality model as above. Sentences are chosen iteratively according to
arg max
i∈Y(X)

αqi(X) −(1 −α) max
j∈Y Sij

,
(172)
where Y is the set of sentences already selected (initially empty), qi(X) is the learned quality
score, and Sij is the cosine similarity between sentences i and j. The tradeoﬀα is optimized
on a development set, and sentences are added until the budget is full. We refer to this
baseline as lr+mmr.
We also compare against the three highest-scoring systems that actually competed in
the DUC 2004 competition—peers 65, 104, and 35—as well as the submodular graph-based
approach recently described by Lin and Bilmes [2010], which we refer to as submod1, and
the improved submodular learning approach proposed by Lin and Bilmes [2012], which we
denote submod2. We produced our own implementation of submod1, but rely on previously
reported numbers for submod2, which include only ROUGE-1 scores.
Table 4 shows the results for all methods on the DUC 2004 test corpus. Scores for the
actual DUC competitors diﬀer slightly from the originally reported results because we use
an updated version of the ROUGE package. Bold entries highlight the best performance
in each column; in the case of MBR inference, which is stochastic, the improvements are
signiﬁcant at 99% conﬁdence. The DPP models outperform the baselines in most cases;
furthermore, there is a signiﬁcant boost in performance due to the use of DPP maximum
likelihood training in place of logistic regression. MBR inference performs best, assuming we
take suﬃciently many samples; on the other hand, greedy inference runs more quickly than
dpp-mbr100 and produces superior results. Relative to most other methods, the DPP model
with MBR inference seems to more strongly emphasize recall. Note that MBR inference was
55

System
ROUGE-1F
ROUGE-1P
ROUGE-1R
ROUGE-2F
ROUGE-SU4F
begin
32.08
31.53
32.69
6.52
10.37
lr+mmr
37.58
37.15
38.05
9.05
13.06
lr+dpp
37.96
37.67
38.31
8.88
13.13
peer 35
37.54
37.69
37.45
8.37
12.90
peer 104
37.12
36.79
37.48
8.49
12.81
peer 65
37.87
37.58
38.20
9.13
13.19
submod1
38.73
38.40
39.11
8.86
13.11
submod2
39.78
39.16
40.43
-
-
dpp-greedy
38.96
38.82
39.15
9.86
13.83
dpp-mbr100
38.83
38.06
39.67
8.85
13.38
dpp-mbr1000
39.79
38.96
40.69
9.29
13.87
dpp-mbr5000
40.33
39.43
41.31
9.54
14.13
Table 4: ROUGE scores on the DUC 2004 test set.
Features
ROUGE-1F
ROUGE-1P
ROUGE-1R
All
38.96
38.82
39.15
All but length
37.38
37.08
37.72
All but position
36.34
35.99
36.72
All but similarity
38.14
37.97
38.35
All but LexRank
38.10
37.92
38.34
All but pronouns
38.80
38.67
38.98
All but similarity, LexRank
36.06
35.84
36.32
Table 5: ROUGE scores for dpp-greedy with features removed.
performed with respect to ROUGE-1F, but could also be run to optimize other metrics if
desired.
Feature contributions. In Table 5 we report the performance of dpp-greedy when
diﬀerent groups of features from Section 4.2.1 are removed, in order to estimate their
relative contributions. Length and position appear to be quite important; however, although
individually similarity and LexRank scores have only a modest impact on performance,
when both are omitted the drop is signiﬁcant. This suggests, intuitively, that these two
groups convey similar information—both are essentially measures of centrality—but that
this information is important to achieving strong performance.
5
k-DPPs
A determinantal point process assigns a probability to every subset of the ground set Y.
This means that, with some probability, a sample from the process will be empty; with
some probability, it will be all of Y. In many cases this is not desirable. For instance, we
might want to use a DPP to model the positions of basketball players on a court, under the
assumption that a team tends to spread out for better coverage. In this setting, we know
that with very high probability each team will have exactly ﬁve players on the court. Thus,
56

if our model gives some probability of seeing zero or ﬁfty players, it is not likely to be a
good ﬁt.
We showed in Section 2.4.4 that there exist elementary DPPs having ﬁxed cardinality k;
however, this is achieved only by focusing exclusively (and equally) on k speciﬁc “aspects”
of the data, as represented by eigenvectors of the kernel. Thus, for DPPs, the notions of size
and content are fundamentally intertwined. We cannot change one without aﬀecting the
other. This is a serious limitation on the types of distributions than can be expressed; for
instance, a DPP cannot even capture the uniform distribution over sets of cardinality k.
More generally, even for applications where the number of items is unknown, the size
model imposed by a DPP may not be a good ﬁt. We have seen that the cardinality of a
DPP sample has a simple distribution: it is the number of successes in a series of Bernoulli
trials. But while this distribution characterizes certain types of data, other cases might look
very diﬀerent. For example, picnickers may tend to stake out diverse positions in a park, but
on warm weekend days there might be hundreds of people, and on a rainy Tuesday night
there are likely to be none. This bimodal distribution is quite unlike the sum of Bernoulli
variables imposed by DPPs.
Perhaps most importantly, in some cases we do not even want to model cardinality at
all, but instead oﬀer it as a parameter. For example, a search engine might need to deliver
ten diverse results to its desktop users, but only ﬁve to its mobile users. This ability to
control the size of a DPP “on the ﬂy” can be crucial in real-world applications.
In this section we introduce k-DPPs, which address the issues described above by
conditioning a DPP on the cardinality of the random set Y . This simple change eﬀectively
divorces the DPP content model, with its intuitive diversifying properties, from the DPP
size model, which is not always appropriate. We can then use the DPP content model with
a size model of our choosing, or simply set the desired size based on context. The result is
a signiﬁcantly more expressive modeling approach (which can even have limited positive
correlations) and increased control.
We begin by deﬁning k-DPPs. The conditionalization they require, though simple in
theory, necessitates new algorithms for inference problems like normalization and sampling.
Naively, these tasks require exponential time, but we show that through recursions for
computing elementary symmetric polynomials we can solve them exactly in polynomial time.
Finally, we demonstrate the use of k-DPPs on an image search problem, where the goal is
to show users diverse sets of images that correspond to their query.
5.1
Deﬁnition
A k-DPP on a discrete set Y = {1, 2, . . . , N} is a distribution over all subsets Y ⊆Y with
cardinality k [Kulesza and Taskar, 2011a]. In contrast to the standard DPP, which models
both the size and content of a random subset Y , a k-DPP is concerned only with the content
of a random k-set. Thus, a k-DPP is obtained by conditioning a standard DPP on the event
that the set Y has cardinality k. Formally, the k-DPP Pk
L gives probabilities
P k
L(Y ) =
det(LY )
P
|Y ′|=k det(LY ′) ,
(173)
57

where |Y | = k and L is a positive semideﬁnite kernel. Compared to the standard DPP, the
only changes are the restriction on Y and the normalization constant. While in a DPP every
k-set Y competes with all other subsets of Y, in a k-DPP it competes only with sets of the
same cardinality. This subtle change has signiﬁcant implications.
For instance, consider the seemingly simple distribution that is uniform over all sets
Y ⊆Y with cardinality k. If we attempt to build a DPP capturing this distribution we
quickly run into diﬃculties. In particular, the marginal probability of any single item is k
N ,
so the marginal kernel K, if it exists, must have k
N on the diagonal. Likewise, the marginal
probability of any pair of items is
k(k−1)
N(N−1), and so by symmetry the oﬀdiagonal entries of K
must be equal to a constant. As a result, any valid marginal kernel has to be the sum of a
constant matrix and a multiple of the identity matrix. Since a constant matrix has at most
one nonzero eigenvalue and the identity matrix is full rank, it is easy to show that, except
in the special cases k = 0, 1, N −1, the resulting kernel has full rank. But we know that a
full rank kernel implies that the probability of seeing all N items together is nonzero. Thus
the desired process cannot be a DPP unless k = 0, 1, N −1, or N. On the other hand, a
k-DPP with the identity matrix as its kernel gives the distribution we are looking for. This
improved expressive power can be quite valuable in practice.
5.1.1
Alternative models of size
Since a k-DPP is conditioned on cardinality, k must come from somewhere outside of the
model. In many cases, k may be ﬁxed according to application needs, or perhaps changed
on the ﬂy by users or depending on context. This ﬂexibility and control is one of the major
practical advantages of k-DPPs. Alternatively, in situations where we wish to model size as
well as content, a k-DPP can be combined with a size model Psize that assigns a probability
to every possible k ∈{1, 2, . . . , N}:
P(Y ) = Psize(|Y |)P|Y |
L (Y ) .
(174)
Since the k-DPP is a proper conditional model, the distribution P is well-deﬁned. By
choosing Psize appropriate to the task at hand, we can eﬀectively take advantage of the
diversifying properties of DPPs in situations where the DPP size model is a poor ﬁt.
As a side eﬀect, this approach actually enables us to use k-DPPs to build models with
both negative and positive correlations. For instance, if Psize indicates that there are likely
to be either hundreds of picnickers in the park (on a nice day) or, otherwise, just a few, then
knowing that there are ﬁfty picnickers today implies that there are likely to be even more.
Thus, k-DPPs can yield more expressive models than DPPs in this sense as well.
5.2
Inference
Of course, increasing the expressive power of the DPP causes us to wonder whether, in
doing so, we might have lost some of the convenient computational properties that made
DPPs useful in the ﬁrst place. Naively, this seems to be the case; for instance, while the
normalizing constant for a DPP can be written in closed form, the sum in Equation (173) is
exponential and seems hard to simplify. In this section, we will show how k-DPP inference
can in fact be performed eﬃciently, using recursions for computing the elementary symmetric
polynomials.
58

5.2.1
Normalization
Recall that the kth elementary symmetric polynomial on λ1, λ2 . . . , λN is given by
ek(λ1, λ2, . . . , λN) =
X
J⊆{1,2,...,N}
|J|=k
Y
n∈J
λn .
(175)
For instance,
e1(λ1, λ2, λ3) = λ1 + λ2 + λ3
(176)
e2(λ1, λ2, λ3) = λ1λ2 + λ1λ3 + λ2λ3
(177)
e3(λ1, λ2, λ3) = λ1λ2λ3 .
(178)
Proposition 5.1. The normalization constant for a k-DPP is
Zk =
X
|Y ′|=k
det(LY ′) = ek(λ1, λ2, . . . , λN) ,
(179)
where λ1, λ2, . . . , λN are the eigenvalues of L.
Proof. One way to see this is to examine the characteristic polynomial of L, det(L −λI)
[Gel’fand, 1989]. We can also show it directly using properties of DPPs. Recalling that
X
Y ⊆Y
det(LY ) = det(L + I) ,
(180)
we have
X
|Y ′|=k
det(LY ′) = det(L + I)
X
|Y ′|=k
PL(Y ′) ,
(181)
where PL is the DPP with kernel L. Applying Lemma 2.6, which expresses any DPP as a
mixture of elementary DPPs, we have
det(L + I)
X
|Y ′|=k
PL(Y ′) =
X
|Y ′|=k
X
J⊆{1,2,...,N}
PVJ(Y ′)
Y
n∈J
λn
(182)
=
X
|J|=k
X
|Y ′|=k
PVJ(Y ′)
Y
n∈J
λn
(183)
=
X
|J|=k
Y
n∈J
λn ,
(184)
where we use Lemma 2.7 in the last two steps to conclude that PVJ(Y ′) = 0 unless |J| = |Y ′|.
(Recall that VJ is the set of eigenvectors of L associated with λn for n ∈J.)
To compute the kth elementary symmetric polynomial, we can use the recursive algorithm
given in Algorithm 7, which is based on the observation that every set of k eigenvalues
either omits λN, in which case we must choose k of the remaining eigenvalues, or includes
λN, in which case we get a factor of λN and choose only k −1 of the remaining eigenvalues.
Formally, letting eN
k be a shorthand for ek(λ1, λ2, . . . , λN), we have
eN
k = eN−1
k
+ λNeN−1
k−1 .
(185)
59

Algorithm 7 Computing the elementary symmetric polynomials
Input: k, eigenvalues λ1, λ2, . . . λN
en
0 ←1
∀n ∈{0, 1, 2, . . . , N}
e0
l ←0
∀l ∈{1, 2, . . . , k}
for l = 1, 2, . . . k do
for n = 1, 2, . . . , N do
en
l ←en−1
l
+ λnen−1
l−1
end for
end for
Output: ek(λ1, λ2, . . . , λN) = eN
k
Note that a variety of recursions for computing elementary symmetric polynomials exist,
including Newton’s identities, the Diﬀerence Algorithm, and the Summation Algorithm
[Baker and Harwell, 1996]. Algorithm 7 is essentially the Summation Algorithm, which is
both asymptotically faster and numerically more stable than the other two, since it uses
only sums and does not rely on precise cancellation of large numbers.
Algorithm 7 runs in time O(Nk). Strictly speaking, the inner loop need only iterate up
to N −k + l in order to obtain eN
k at the end; however, by going up to N we compute all
of the preceding elementary symmetric polynomials eN
l
along the way. Thus, by running
Algorithm 7 with k = N we can compute the normalizers for k-DPPs of every size in time
O(N2). This can be useful when k is not known in advance.
5.2.2
Sampling
Since a k-DPP is just a DPP conditioned on size, we could sample a k-DPP by repeatedly
sampling the corresponding DPP and rejecting the samples until we obtain one of size k. To
make this more eﬃcient, recall from Section 2.4.4 that the standard DPP sampling algorithm
proceeds in two phases. First, a subset V of the eigenvectors of L is selected at random,
and then a set of cardinality |V | is sampled based on those eigenvectors. Since the size of a
sample is ﬁxed in the ﬁrst phase, we could reject the samples before the second phase even
begins, waiting until we have |V | = k. However, rejection sampling is likely to be slow. It
would be better to directly sample a set V conditioned on the fact that its cardinality is
k. In this section we show how sampling k eigenvectors can be done eﬃciently, yielding a
sampling algorithm for k-DPPs that is asymptotically as fast as sampling standard DPPs.
We can formalize the intuition above by rewriting the k-DPP distribution in terms of
the corresponding DPP:
Pk
L(Y ) = 1
eN
k
det(L + I)PL(Y )
(186)
whenever |Y | = k, where we replace the DPP normalization constant with the k-DPP
normalization constant using Proposition 5.1. Applying Lemma 2.6 and Lemma 2.7 to
decompose the DPP into elementary parts yields
Pk
L(Y ) = 1
eN
k
X
|J|=k
PVJ(Y )
Y
n∈J
λn .
(187)
60

Algorithm 8 Sampling k eigenvectors
Input: k, eigenvalues λ1, λ2, . . . , λN
compute en
l for l = 0, 1, . . . , k and n = 0, 1, . . . , N (Algorithm 7)
J ←∅
l ←k
for n = N, . . . , 2, 1 do
if l = 0 then
break
end if
if u ∼U[0, 1] < λn
en−1
l−1
en
l
then
J ←J ∪{n}
l ←l −1
end if
end for
Output: J
Therefore, a k-DPP is also a mixture of elementary DPPs, but it only gives nonzero weight
to those of dimension k. Since the second phase of DPP sampling provides a means for
sampling from any given elementary DPP, we can sample from a k-DPP if we can sample
index sets J according to the corresponding mixture components. Like normalization, this
is naively an exponential task, but we can do it eﬃciently using the recursive properties of
elementary symmetric polynomials.
Theorem 5.2. Let J be the desired random variable, so that Pr(J = J) =
1
eN
k
Q
n∈J λn
when |J| = k, and zero otherwise. Then Algorithm 8 yields a sample for J.
Proof. If k = 0, then Algorithm 8 returns immediately at the ﬁrst iteration of the loop with
J = ∅, which is the only possible value of J.
If N = 1 and k = 1, then J must contain the single index 1. We have e1
1 = λ1 and
e0
0 = 1, thus λ1
e0
0
e1
1 = 1, and Algorithm 8 returns J = {1} with probability 1.
We proceed by induction and compute the probability that Algorithm 8 returns J for
N > 1 and 1 ≤k ≤N. By inductive hypothesis, if an iteration of the loop in Algorithm 8
begins with n < N and 0 ≤l ≤n, then the remainder of the algorithm adds to J a set of
elements J′ with probability
1
en
l
Y
n′∈J′
λn′
(188)
if |J′| = l, and zero otherwise.
Now suppose that J contains N, J = J′ ∪{N}. Then N must be added to J in the
ﬁrst iteration of the loop, which occurs with probability λN
eN−1
k−1
eN
k
. The second iteration then
begins with n = N −1 and l = k −1. If l is zero, we have the immediate base case; otherwise
we have 1 ≤l ≤n. By the inductive hypothesis, the remainder of the algorithm selects J′
with probability
1
eN−1
k−1
Y
n∈J′
λn
(189)
61

if |J′| = k −1, and zero otherwise. Thus Algorithm 8 returns J with probability
 
λN
eN−1
k−1
eN
k
!
1
eN−1
k−1
Y
n∈J′
λn = 1
eN
k
Y
n∈J
λn
(190)
if |J| = k, and zero otherwise.
On the other hand, if J does not contain N, then the ﬁrst iteration must add nothing to
J; this happens with probability
1 −λN
eN−1
k−1
eN
k
= eN−1
k
eN
k
,
(191)
where we use the fact that eN
k −λNeN−1
k−1 = eN−1
k
. The second iteration then begins with
n = N −1 and l = k. We observe that if N −1 < k, then Equation (191) is equal to zero,
since en
l = 0 whenever l > n. Thus almost surely the second iteration begins with k ≤n, and
we can apply the inductive hypothesis. This guarantees that the remainder of the algorithm
chooses J with probability
1
eN−1
k
Y
n∈J
λn
(192)
whenever |J| = k. The overall probability that Algorithm 8 returns J is therefore
 
eN−1
k
eN
k
!
1
eN−1
k
Y
n∈J
λn = 1
eN
k
Y
n∈J
λn
(193)
if |J| = k, and zero otherwise.
Algorithm 8 precomputes the values of e1
1, . . . , eN
k , which requires O(Nk) time using
Algorithm 7. The loop then iterates at most N times and requires only a constant number
of operations, so Algorithm 8 runs in O(Nk) time overall. By Equation (187), selecting J
with Algorithm 8 and then sampling from the elementary DPP PVJ generates a sample from
the k-DPP. As shown in Section 2.4.4, sampling an elementary DPP can be done in O(Nk3)
time (see the second loop of Algorithm 1), so sampling k-DPPs is O(Nk3) overall, assuming
we have an eigendecomposition of the kernel in advance. This is no more expensive than
sampling a standard DPP.
62

5.2.3
Marginalization
Since k-DPPs are not DPPs, they do not in general have marginal kernels. However, we can
still use their connection to DPPs to compute the marginal probability of a set A, |A| ≤k:
Pk
L(A ⊆Y ) =
X
|Y ′|=k−|A|
A∩Y ′=∅
Pk
L(Y ′ ∪A)
(194)
= det(L + I)
Zk
X
|Y ′|=k−|A|
A∩Y ′=∅
PL(Y ′ ∪A)
(195)
= det(L + I)
Zk
X
|Y ′|=k−|A|
A∩Y ′=∅
PL(Y = Y ′ ∪A|A ⊆Y )PL(A ⊆Y )
(196)
=
ZA
k−|A|
Zk
det(L + I)
det(LA + I)PL(A ⊆Y ) ,
(197)
where LA is the kernel, given in Equation (42), of the DPP conditioned on the inclusion of
A, and
ZA
k−|A| = det(LA + I)
X
|Y ′|=k−|A|
A∩Y ′=∅
PL(Y = Y ′ ∪A|A ⊆Y )
(198)
=
X
|Y ′|=k−|A|
A∩Y ′=∅
det(LA
Y ′)
(199)
is the normalization constant for the (k −|A|)-DPP with kernel LA. That is, the marginal
probabilities for a k-DPP are just the marginal probabilities for a DPP with the same kernel,
but with an appropriate change of normalizing constants. We can simplify Equation (197)
by observing that
det(LA)
det(L + I) = PL(A ⊆Y )
det(LA + I) ,
(200)
since the left hand side is the probability (under the DPP with kernel L) that A occurs by
itself, and the right hand side is the marginal probability of A multiplied by the probability
of observing nothing else conditioned on observing A: 1/ det(LA + I). Thus we have
Pk
L(A ⊆Y ) =
ZA
k−|A|
Zk
det(LA) = ZA
k−|A|Pk
L(A) .
(201)
That is, the marginal probability of A is the probability of observing exactly A times the
normalization constant when conditioning on A. Note that a version of this formula also
holds for standard DPPs, but there it can be rewritten in terms of the marginal kernel.
Singleton marginals
Equations (197) and (201) are general but require computing large
determinants and elementary symmetric polynomials, regardless of the size of A. Moreover,
those quantities (for example, det(LA + I)) must be recomputed for each unique A whose
63

marginal probability is desired. Thus, ﬁnding the marginal probabilities of many small sets
is expensive compared to a standard DPP, where we need only small minors of K. However,
we can derive a more eﬃcient approach in the special but useful case where we want to
know all of the singleton marginals for a k-DPP—for instance, in order to implement quality
learning as described in Section 4.2.
We start by using Equation (187) to write the marginal probability of an item i in terms
of a combination of elementary DPPs:
Pk
L(i ∈Y ) = 1
eN
k
X
|J|=k
PVJ(i ∈Y )
Y
n′∈J
λn′ .
(202)
Because the marginal kernel of the elementary DPP PVJ is given by P
n∈J vnv⊤
n , we have
Pk
L(i ∈Y ) = 1
eN
k
X
|J|=k
 X
n∈J
(v⊤
n ei)2
! Y
n′∈J
λn′
(203)
= 1
eN
k
N
X
n=1
(v⊤
n ei)2
X
J⊇{n},|J|=k
Y
n′∈J
λn′
(204)
=
N
X
n=1
(v⊤
n ei)2λn
e−n
k−1
eN
k
,
(205)
where e−n
k−1 = ek−1(λ1, λ2, . . . , λn−1, λn+1, . . . , λN) denotes the (k −1)-order elementary
symmetric polynomial for all eigenvalues of L except λn. Note that λne−n
k−1/eN
k is exactly
the marginal probability that n ∈J when J is chosen using Algorithm 8; in other words,
the marginal probability of item i is the sum of the contributions (v⊤
n ei)2 made by each
eigenvector scaled by the respective probabilities that the eigenvectors are selected. The
contributions are easily computed from the eigendecomposition of L, thus we need only eN
k
and e−n
k−1 for each value of n in order to calculate the marginals for all items in O(N2) time,
or O(ND) time if the rank of L is D < N.
Algorithm 7 computes eN−1
k−1 = e−N
k−1 in the process of obtaining eN
k , so naively we could
run Algorithm 7 N times, repeatedly reordering the eigenvectors so that each takes a turn
at the last position. To compute all of the required polynomials in this fashion would
require O(N2k) time. However, we can improve this (for small k) to O(N log(N)k2); to
do so we will make use of a binary tree on N leaves. Each node of the tree corresponds
to a set of eigenvalues of L; the leaves represent single eigenvalues, and an interior node
of the tree represents the set of eigenvalues corresponding to its descendant leaves. (See
Figure 13.) We will associate with each node the set of elementary symmetric polynomials
e1(Λ), e2(Λ), . . . , ek(Λ), where Λ is the set of eigenvalues represented by the node.
These polynomials can be computed directly for leaf nodes in constant time, and the
polynomials of an interior node can be computed given those of its children using a simple
recursion:
ek(Λ1 ∪Λ2) =
k
X
l=0
el(Λ1)ek−l(Λ2) .
(206)
64

12345678
1234
12
1
2
34
3
4
5678
56
5
6
78
7
8
Figure 13: Binary tree with N = 8 leaves; interior nodes represent their descendant leaves.
Removing a path from leaf n to the root leaves log N subtrees that can be combined to
compute e−n
k−1.
Thus, we can compute the polynomials for the entire tree in O(N log(N)k2) time; this is
suﬃcient to obtain eN
k at the root node.
However, if we now remove a leaf node corresponding to eigenvalue n, we invalidate
the polynomials along the path from the leaf to the root; see Figure 13. This leaves log N
disjoint subtrees which together represent all of the eigenvalues of L, leaving out λn. We can
now apply Equation (206) log N times to the roots of these trees in order to obtain e−n
k−1 in
O(log(N)k2) time. If we do this for each value of n, the total additional time required is
O(N log(N)k2).
The algorithm described above thus takes O(N log(N)k2) time to produce the necessary
elementary symmetric polynomials, which in turn allow us to compute all of the singleton
marginals. This is a dramatic improvement over applying Equation (197) to each item
separately.
5.2.4
Conditioning
Suppose we want to condition a k-DPP on the inclusion of a particular set A. For |A|+|B| = k
we have
Pk
L(Y = A ∪B|A ⊆Y ) ∝Pk
L(Y = A ∪B)
(207)
∝PL(Y = A ∪B)
(208)
∝PL(Y = A ∪B|A ⊆Y )
(209)
∝det(LA
B) .
(210)
Thus the conditional k-DPP is a k −|A|-DPP whose kernel is the same as that of the
associated conditional DPP. The normalization constant is ZA
k−|A|. We can condition on
excluding A in the same manner.
65

5.2.5
Finding the mode
Unfortunately, although k-DPPs oﬀer the eﬃcient versions of DPP inference algorithms
presented above, ﬁnding the most likely set Y remains intractable. It is easy to see that the
reduction from Section 2.4.5 still applies, since the cardinality of the Y corresponding to an
exact 3-cover, if it exists, is known. In practice we can utilize greedy approximations, like
we did for standard DPPs in Section 4.2.1.
5.3
Experiments: image search
We demonstrate the use of k-DPPs on an image search task [Kulesza and Taskar, 2011a].
The motivation is as follows. Suppose that we run an image search engine, where our
primary goal is to deliver the most relevant possible images to our users. Unfortunately, the
query strings those users provide are often ambiguous. For instance, a user searching for
“philadelphia” might be looking for pictures of the city skyline, street-level shots of buildings,
or perhaps iconic sights like the Liberty Bell or the Love sculpture. Furthermore, even if
we know the user is looking for a skyline photograph, he or she might speciﬁcally want
a daytime or nighttime shot, a particular angle, and so on. In general, we cannot expect
users to provide enough information in a textual query to identify the best image with any
certainty.
For this reason search engines typically provide a small array of results, and we argue
that, to maximize the probability of the user being happy with at least one image, the
results should be relevant to the query but also diverse with respect to one another. That is,
if we want to maximize the proportion of users searching “philadelphia” who are satisﬁed by
our response, each image we return should satisfy a large but distinct subset of those users,
thus maximizing our overall coverage. Since we want diverse results but also require control
over the number of results we provide, a k-DPP is a natural ﬁt.
5.3.1
Learning setup
Of course, we do not actually run a search engine and do not have real users. Thus, in order
to be able to evaluate our model using real human feedback, we deﬁne the task in a manner
that allows us to obtain inexpensive human supervision via Amazon Mechanical Turk. We
do this by establishing a simple binary decision problem, where the goal is to choose, given
two possible sets of image search results, the set that is more diverse. Formally, our labeled
training data comprises comparative pairs of image sets {(Y +
t , Y −
t )}T
t=1, where set Y +
t
is
preferred over set Y −
t , |Y +
t | = |Y −
t | = k. We can measure performance on this classiﬁcation
task using the zero-one loss, which is zero whenever we choose the correct set from a given
pair, and one otherwise.
For this task we employ a simple method for learning a combination of k-DPPs that is
convex and seems to work well in practice. Given a set L1, L2, . . . , LD of “expert” kernel
matrices, which are ﬁxed in advance, deﬁne the combination model
Pk
θ =
D
X
l=1
θlPk
Ll ,
(211)
66

−4
−2
0
2
4
0
1
2
3
4
z
log(1+e−z)
Figure 14: The logistic loss function.
where PD
l=1 θl = 1. Note that this is a combination of distributions, rather than a combination
of kernels. We will learn θ to optimize a logistic loss measure on the binary task:
min
θ
L(θ) =
T
X
t=1
log

1 + e−γ[Pk
θ (Y +
t )−Pk
θ (Y −
t )]
s.t.
D
X
l=1
θl = 1 ,
(212)
where γ is a hyperparameter that controls how aggressively we penalize mistakes. Intuitively,
the idea is to ﬁnd a combination of k-DPPs where the positive sets Y +
t
receive higher
probability than the corresponding negative sets Y −
t . By using the logistic loss (Figure 14),
which acts like a smooth hinge loss, we focus on making fewer mistakes.
Because Equation (212) is convex in θ (it is the composition of the convex logistic
loss function with a linear function of θ), we can optimize it eﬃciently using projected
gradient descent, where we alternate taking gradient steps and projecting on the constraint
PD
l=1 θl = 1. The gradient is given by
∇L =
T
X
t=1
eθ⊤δt
1 + eθ⊤δt δt ,
(213)
where δt is a vector with entries
δt
l = −γ
h
Pk
Ll(Y +
t ) −Pk
Ll(Y −
t )
i
.
(214)
Projection onto the simplex is achieved using standard algorithms [Bertsekas, 1999].
5.3.2
Data
We create datasets for three broad image search categories, using 8–12 hand-selected queries
for each category. (See Table 6.) For each query, we retrieve the top 64 results from Google
Image Search, restricting the search to JPEG ﬁles that pass the strictest level of Safe Search
ﬁltering. Of those 64 results, we eliminate any that are no longer available for download.
On average this leaves us with 63.0 images per query, with a range of 59–64.
67

cars
cities
dogs
chrysler
baltimore
beagle
ford
barcelona
bernese
honda
london
blue heeler
mercedes
los angeles
cocker spaniel
mitsubishi
miami
collie
nissan
new york city
great dane
porsche
paris
labrador
toyota
philadelphia
pomeranian
san francisco
poodle
shanghai
pug
tokyo
schnauzer
toronto
shih tzu
Table 6: Queries used for data collection.
We then use the downloaded images to generate 960 training instances for each category,
spread evenly across the diﬀerent queries. In order to compare k-DPPs directly against
baseline heuristic methods that do not model probabilities of full sets, we generate only
instances where Y +
t
and Y −
t
diﬀer by a single element. That is, the classiﬁcation problem is
eﬀectively to choose which of two candidate images i+
t , ii
t is a less redundant addition to a
given partial result set Yt:
Y +
t
= Yt ∪{i+
t }
Y −
t
= Yt ∪{i−
t } .
(215)
In our experiments Yt contains ﬁve images, so k = |Y +
t | = |Y −
t | = 6. We sample partial
result sets using a k-DPP with a SIFT-based kernel (details below) to encourage diversity.
The candidates are then selected uniformly at random from the remaining images, except for
10% of instances that are reserved for measuring the performance of our human judges. For
those instances, one of the candidates is a duplicate image chosen uniformly at random from
the partial result set, making it the obviously more redundant choice. The other candidate
is chosen as usual.
In order to decide which candidate actually results in the more diverse set, we collect
human diversity judgments using Amazon’s Mechanical Turk. Annotators are drawn from
the general pool of Turk workers, and are able to label as many instances as they wish.
Annotators are paid $0.01 USD for each instance that they label. For practical reasons, we
present the images to the annotators at reduced scale; the larger dimension of an image is
always 250 pixels. The annotators are instructed to choose the candidate that they feel is
“less similar” to the images in the partial result set. We do not oﬀer any speciﬁc guidance on
how to judge similarity, since dealing with uncertainty in human users is central to the task.
The candidate images are presented in random order. Figure 15 shows a sample instance
from each category.
Overall, we ﬁnd that workers choose the correct image for 80.8% of the calibration
instances (that is, they choose the one not belonging to the partial result set). This suggests
only moderate levels of noise due to misunderstanding, inattention or robot workers. However,
for non-calibration instances the task is inherently diﬃcult and subjective. To keep noise
68

Figure 15: Sample labeling instances from each search category. The ﬁve images on the left
form the partial result set, and the two candidates are shown on the right. The candidate
receiving the majority of annotator votes has a blue border.
in check, we have each instance labeled by ﬁve independent judges, and keep only those
instances where four or more judges agree. In the end this leaves us with 408–482 labeled
instances per category, or about half of the original instances.
5.3.3
Kernels
We deﬁne a set of 55 “expert” similarity kernels for the collected images, which form the
building blocks of our combination model and baseline methods. Each kernel Lf is the
Gram matrix of some feature function f; that is, Lf
ij = f(i) · f(j) for images i and j. We
therefore specify the kernels through the feature functions used to generate them. All of our
feature functions are normalized so that ∥f(i)∥2 = 1 for all i; this ensures that no image is
a priori more likely than any other. Implicitly, thinking in terms of the decomposition in
Section 3.1, we are assuming that all of the images in our set are equally relevant in order
to isolate the modeling of diversity. This assumption is at least partly justiﬁed by the fact
that our images come from actual Google searches, and are thus presumably relevant to the
query.
We use the following feature functions, which derive from standard image processing
and feature extraction methods:
• Color (2 variants): Each pixel is assigned a coordinate in three-dimensional Lab color
space. The colors are then sorted into axis-aligned bins, producing a histogram of
either 8 or 64 dimensions.
• SIFT (2 variants): The images are processed with the vlfeat toolbox to obtain sets
of 128-dimensional SIFT descriptors [Lowe, 1999, Vedaldi and Fulkerson, 2008]. The
descriptors for a given category are combined, subsampled to a set of 25,000, and
then clustered using k-means into either 256 or 512 clusters. The feature vector for
69

an image is the normalized histogram of the nearest clusters to the descriptors in the
image.
• GIST: The images are processed using code from Oliva and Torralba [2006] to
yield 960-dimensional GIST feature vectors characterizing properties like “openness,”
“roughness,” “naturalness,” and so on.
In addition to the ﬁve feature functions described above, we include another ﬁve that are
identical but focus only on the center of the image, deﬁned as the centered rectangle with
dimensions half those of the original image. This gives our ﬁrst ten kernels. We then create
45 pairwise combination kernels by concatenating every possible pair of the 10 basic feature
vectors. This technique produces kernels that synthesize more than one source of information,
oﬀering greater ﬂexibility.
Finally, we augment our kernels by adding a constant hyperparameter ρ to each entry.
ρ acts a knob for controlling the overall preference for diversity; as ρ increases, all images
appear more similar, thus increasing repulsion. In our experiments, ρ is chosen independently
for each method and each category to optimize performance on the training set.
5.3.4
Methods
We test four diﬀerent methods. Two use k-DPPs, and two are derived from Maximum
Marginal Relevance (MMR) [Carbonell and Goldstein, 1998]. For each approach, we test
both the single best expert kernel on the training data and a learned combination of kernels.
All methods were tuned separately for each of the three query categories. On each run
a random 25% of the labeled examples are reserved for testing, and the remaining 75%
form the training set used for setting hyperparameters and training. Recall that Yt is the
ﬁve-image partial result set for instance t, and let Ct = {i+
t , i−
t } denote the set of two
candidates images, where i+
t is the candidate preferred by the human judges.
Best k-DPP
Given a single kernel L, the k-DPP prediction is
kDPPt = arg max
i∈Ct
P6
L(Yt ∪{i}) .
(216)
We select the kernel with the best zero-one accuracy on the training set, and apply it to the
test set.
Mixture of k-DPPs
We apply our learning method to the full set of 55 kernels, optimizing
Equation (212) on the training set to obtain a 55-dimensional mixture vector θ. We set γ
to minimize the zero-one training loss. We then take the learned θ and apply it to making
predictions on the test set:
kDPPmixt = arg max
i∈Ct
55
X
l=1
θlP6
Ll(Yt ∪{i}) .
(217)
70

Best MMR
Recall that MMR is a standard, heuristic technique for generating diverse
sets of search results. The idea is to build a set iteratively by adding on each round a
result that maximizes a weighted combination of relevance (with respect to the query) and
diversity, measured as the maximum similarity to any of the previously selected results.
(See Section 4.2.1 for more details about MMR.) For our experiments, we assume relevance
is uniform; hence we merely need to decide which of the two candidates has the smaller
maximum similarity to the partial result set. Thus, for a given kernel L, the MMR prediction
is
MMRt = arg min
i∈Ct

max
j∈Yt Lij

.
(218)
As for the k-DPP, we select the single best kernel on the training set, and apply it to the
test set.
Mixture MMR
We can also attempt to learn a mixture of similarity kernels for MMR. We
use the same training approach as for k-DPPs, but replace the probability score P k
θ (Yy ∪{i})
with the negative cost
−cθ(Yt, i) = −max
j∈Yt
D
X
l=1
θl[Ll]ij ,
(219)
which is just the negative similarity of item i to the set Yt under the combined kernel metric.
Signiﬁcantly, this substitution makes the optimization non-smooth and non-convex, unlike
the k-DPP optimization. In practice this means that the global optimum is not easily found.
However, even a local optimum may provide advantages over the single best kernel. In our
experiments we use the local optimum found by projected gradient descent starting from
the uniform kernel combination.
5.3.5
Results
Table 7 shows the mean zero-one accuracy of each method for each query category, averaged
over 100 random train/test splits. Statistical signiﬁcance is computed by bootstrapping.
Regardless of whether we learn a mixture, k-DPPs outperform MMR on two of the three
categories, signiﬁcant at 99% conﬁdence. In all cases, the learned mixture of k-DPPs achieves
the best performance. Note that, because the decision being made for each instance is
binary, 50% is equivalent to random performance. Thus the numbers in Table 7 suggest that
this is a rather diﬃcult task, a conclusion supported by the rates of noise exhibited by the
human judges. However, the changes in performance due to learning and the use of k-DPPs
are more obviously signiﬁcant when measured as improvements above this baseline level.
For example, in the cars category our mixture of k-DPPs performs 14.58 percentage points
better than random, versus 9.59 points for MMR with a mixture of kernels. Figure 16 shows
some actual samples drawn using the k-DPP sampling algorithm.
Table 8 shows, for the k-DPP mixture model, the kernels receiving the highest weights
for each search category (on average over 100 train/test splits). Combined-feature kernels
appear to be useful, and the three categories exhibit signiﬁcant diﬀerences in what annotators
deem diverse, as we might expect.
71

Best
Best
Mixture
Mixture
Category
MMR
k-DPP
MMR
k-DPP
cars
55.95
57.98
59.59
64.58
cities
56.48
56.31
60.99
61.29
dogs
56.23
57.70
57.39
59.84
Table 7: Percentage of real-world image search examples judged the same way as the majority
of human annotators. Bold results are signiﬁcantly higher than others in the same row with
99% conﬁdence.
k=2
k=4
“porsche”
k=2
k=4
“philadelphia”
k=2
k=4
“cocker spaniel”
Figure 16: Samples from the k-DPP mixture model.
72

color-8-center & sift-256
(0.13)
cars
color-8-center & sift-512
(0.11)
color-8-center
(0.07)
sift-512-center
(0.85)
cities
gist
(0.08)
color-8-center & gist
(0.03)
color-8-center
(0.39)
dogs
color-8-center & sift-512
(0.21)
color-8-center & sift-256
(0.20)
Table 8: Kernels receiving the highest average weights for each category (shown in parenthe-
ses). Ampersands indicate kernels generated from pairs of feature functions.
Single kernel
Uniform
MMR
Category
(average)
mixture
mixture
cars
57.58
68.31
58.15
cities
59.00
64.76
62.32
dogs
57.78
62.12
57.86
Table 9: The percentage of virtual users whose desired image is more similar to the k-DPP
results than the MMR results. Above 50 indicates better k-DPP performance; below 50
indicates better MMR performance. The results for the 55 individual expert kernels are
averaged in the ﬁrst column.
We can also return to our original motivation and try to measure how well each method
“covers” the space of likely user intentions. Since we do not have access to real users who are
searching for the queries in our dataset, we instead simulate them by imagining that each is
looking for a particular target image drawn randomly from the images in our collection. For
instance, given the query “philadelphia” we might draw a target image of the Love sculpture,
and then evaluate each method on whether it selects an image of the Love sculpture, i.e.,
whether it satisﬁes that virtual user. More generally, we will simply record the maximum
similarity of any image in the result set to the target image. We expect better methods to
show higher similarity when averaged over a large number of such users.
We consider only the mixture models here, since they perform best. For each virtual
user, we sample a ten-image result set YDPP using the mixture k-DPP, and select a second
ten-image result set YMMR using the mixture MMR. For MMR, the ﬁrst image is selected
uniformly at random, since they are assumed to be uniformly relevant. Subsequent selections
are deterministic. Given a target image i drawn uniformly at random, we then compute
similarities
sDPP(i) = max
j∈YDPP Lij
sMMR(i) =
max
j∈YMMR Lij
(220)
for a particular similarity kernel L. We report the fraction of the time that sDPP(i) > sMMR(i);
that is, the fraction of the time that our virtual user would be better served by the k-DPP
model. Because we have no gold standard kernel L for measuring similarity, we try several
73

possibilities, including all 55 expert kernels, a uniform combination of the expert kernels,
and the combination learned by MMR. (Note that the mixture k-DPP does not learn a
kernel combination, hence there is no corresponding mixture to try here.) Table 9 shows the
results, averaged across all of the virtual users (i.e., all the images in our collection). Even
when using the mixture learned to optimize MMR itself, the k-DPP does a better job of
covering the space of possible user intentions. All results in Table 9 are signiﬁcantly higher
than 50% at 99% conﬁdence.
6
Structured DPPs
We have seen in the preceding sections that DPPs oﬀer polynomial-time inference and
learning with respect to N, the number of items in the ground set Y. This is important
since DPPs model an exponential number of subsets Y ⊆Y, so naive algorithms would
be intractable. And yet, we can imagine DPP applications for which even linear time is
too slow. For example, suppose that after modeling the positions of basketball players,
as proposed in the previous section, we wanted to take our analysis one step further. An
obvious extension is to realize that a player does not simply occupy a single position, but
instead moves around the court over time. Thus, we might want to model not just diverse
sets of positions on the court, but diverse sets of paths around the court during a game.
While we could reasonably discretize the possible court positions to a manageable number
M, the number of paths over, say, 100 time steps would be M100, making it almost certainly
impossible to enumerate them all, let alone build an M100 × M100 kernel matrix.
However, in this combinatorial setting we can take advantage of the fact that, even
though there are exponentially many paths, they are structured; that is, every path is built
from a small number of the same basic components. This kind of structure has frequently
been exploited in machine learning, for example, to ﬁnd the best translation of a sentence,
or to compute the marginals of a Markov random ﬁeld. In such cases structure allows us to
factor computations over exponentially many possibilities in an eﬃcient way. And yet, the
situation for structured DPPs is even worse: when the number of items in Y is exponential,
we are actually modeling a distribution over the doubly exponential number of subsets of
an exponential Y. If there are M100 possible paths, there are 2M100 subsets of paths, and a
DPP assigns a probability to every one. This poses an extreme computational challenge.
In order to develop eﬃcient structured DPPs (SDPPs), we will therefore need to combine
the dynamic programming techniques used for standard structured prediction with the
algorithms that make DPP inference eﬃcient. We will show how this can be done by
applying the dual DPP representation from Section 3.3, which shares spectral properties
with the kernel L but is manageable in size, and the use of second-order message passing,
where the usual sum-product or min-sum semiring is replaced with a special structure that
computes quadratic quantities over a factor graph [Li and Eisner, 2009]. In the end, we will
demonstrate that it is possible to normalize and sample from an SDPP in polynomial time.
Structured DPPs open up a large variety of new possibilities for applications; they allow
us to model diverse sets of essentially any structured objects. For instance, we could ﬁnd
not only the best translation but a diverse set of high-quality translations for a sentence,
perhaps to aid a human translator. Or, we could study the distinct proteins coded by a
gene under alternative RNA splicings, using the diversifying properties of DPPs to cover
74

the large space of possibilities with a small representative set. Later, we will apply SDPPs
to three real-world tasks: identifying multiple human poses in images, where there are
combinatorially many possible poses, and we assume that the poses are diverse in that they
tend not to overlap; identifying salient lines of research in a corpus of computer science
publications, where the structures are citation chains of important papers, and we want
to ﬁnd a small number of chains that covers the major topic in the corpus; and building
threads from news text, where the goal is to extract from a large corpus of articles the most
signiﬁcant news stories, and for each story present a sequence of articles covering the major
developments of that story through time.
We begin by deﬁning SDPPs and stating the structural assumptions that are necessary
to make inference eﬃcient; we then show how these assumptions give rise to polynomial-time
algorithms using second order message passing. We discuss how sometimes even these
polynomial algorithms can be too slow in practice, but demonstrate that by applying the
technique of random projections (Section 3.4) we can dramatically speed up computation
and reduce memory use while maintaining a close approximation to the original model
[Kulesza and Taskar, 2010]. Finally, we show how SDPPs can be applied to the experimental
settings described above, yielding improved results compared with a variety of standard and
heuristic baseline approaches.
6.1
Factorization
In Section 2.4 we saw that DPPs remain tractable on modern computers for N up to around
10,000. This is no small feat, given that the number of subsets of 10,000 items is roughly the
number of particles in the observable universe to the 40th power. Of course, this is not magic
but simply a consequence of a certain type of structure; that is, we can perform inference
with DPPs because the probabilities of these subsets are expressed as combinations of only a
relatively small set of O(N2) parameters. In order to make the jump now to ground sets Y
that are exponentially large, we will need to make an similar assumption about the structure
of Y itself. Thus, a structured DPP (SDPP) is a DPP in which the ground set Y is given
implicitly by combinations of a set of parts. For instance, the parts could be positions on
the court, and an element of Y a sequence of those positions. Or the parts could be rules of
a context-free grammar, and then an element of Y might be a complete parse of a sentence.
This assumption of structure will give us the algorithmic leverage we need to eﬃciently work
with a distribution over a doubly exponential number of possibilities.
Because elements of Y are now structures, we will no longer think of Y = {1, 2, . . . , N};
instead, each element y ∈Y is a structure given by a sequence of R parts (y1, y2, . . . , yR),
each of which takes a value from a ﬁnite set of M possibilities. For example, if y is the path
of a basketball player, then R is the number of time steps at which the player’s position is
recorded, and yr is the player’s discretized position at time r. We will use yi to denote the
ith structure in Y under an arbitrary ordering; thus Y = {y1, y2, . . . , yN}, where N = MR.
The parts of yi are denoted yir.
An immediate challenge is that the kernel L, which has N2 entries, can no longer
be written down explicitly.
We therefore deﬁne its entries using the quality/diversity
decomposition presented in Section 3.1. Recall that this decomposition gives the entries of
75

L as follows:
Lij = q(yi)φ(yi)⊤φ(yj)q(yj) ,
(221)
where q(yi) is a nonnegative measure of the quality of structure yi, and φ(yi) is a D-
dimensional vector of diversity features so that φ(yi)⊤φ(yj) is a measure of the similarity
between structures yi and yj. We cannot aﬀord to specify q and φ for every possible
structure, but we can use the assumption that structures are built from parts to deﬁne a
factorization, analogous to the factorization over cliques that gives rise to Markov random
ﬁelds.
Speciﬁcally, we assume that the model decomposes over a set of factors F, where a
factor α ∈F is a small subset of the parts of a structure. (Keeping the factors small will
ensure that the model is tractable.) We denote by yα the collection of parts of y that are
included in factor α; then the factorization assumption is that the quality score decomposes
multiplicatively over parts, and the diversity features decompose additively:
q(y) =
Y
α∈F
qα(yα)
(222)
φ(y) =
X
α∈F
φα(yα) .
(223)
We argue that these are quite natural factorizations. For instance, in our player tracking
example we might have a positional factor for each time r, allowing the quality model to
prefer paths that go through certain high-traﬃc areas, and a transitional factor for each pair
of times (r −1, r), allowing the quality model to enforce the smoothness of a path over time.
More generally, if the parts correspond to cliques in a graph, then the quality scores can be
given by a standard log-linear Markov random ﬁeld (MRF), which deﬁnes a multiplicative
distribution over structures that give labelings of the graph. Thus, while in Section 3.2 we
compared DPPs and MRFs as alternative models for the same binary labeling problems,
SDPPs can also be seen as an extension to MRFs, allowing us to take a model of individual
structures and use it as a quality measure for modeling diverse sets of structures.
Diversity features, on the other hand, decompose additively, so we can think of them
as global feature functions deﬁned by summing local features, again as done in standard
structured prediction. For example, φr(yr) could track the coarse-level position of a player
at time r, so that paths passing through similar positions at similar times are less likely
to co-occur. Note that, in contrast to the unstructured case, we do not generally have
∥φ(y)∥= 1, since there is no way to enforce such a constraint under the factorization in
Equation (223). Instead, we simply set the factor features φα(yα) to have unit norm for all
α and all possible values of yα. This slightly biases the model towards structures that have
the same (or similar) features at every factor, since such structures maximize ∥φ∥. However,
the eﬀect of this bias seems to be minor in practice.
As for unstructured DPPs, the quality and diversity models combine to produce balanced,
high-quality, diverse results. However, in the structured case the contribution of the diversity
model can be especially signiﬁcant due to the combinatorial nature of the items in Y. For
instance, imagine taking a particular high-quality path and perturbing it slightly, say by
shifting the position at each time step by a small random amount. This process results in
a new and distinct path, but is unlikely to have a signiﬁcant eﬀect on the overall quality:
76

the path remains smooth and goes through roughly the same positions. Of course, this
is not unique to the structured case; we can have similar high-quality items in any DPP.
What makes the problem especially serious here is that there is a combinatorial number of
such slightly perturbed paths; the introduction of structure dramatically increases not only
the number of items in Y, but also the number of subtle variations that we might want to
suppress. Furthermore, factored distributions over structures are often very peaked due to
the geometric combination of quality scores across many factors, so variations of the most
likely structure can be much more probable than any real alternative. For these reasons
independent samples from an MRF can often look nearly identical; a sample from an SDPP,
on the other hand, is much more likely to contain a truly diverse set of structures.
6.1.1
Synthetic example: particle tracking
Before describing the technical details needed to make SDPPs computationally eﬃcient, we
ﬁrst develop some intuition by studying the results of the model as applied to a synthetic
motion tracking task, where the goal is to follow a collection of particles as they travel in
a one-dimensional space over time. This is essentially a simpliﬁed version of our player
tracking example, but with the motion restricted to a line. We will assume that a path y
has 50 parts, where each part yr ∈{1, 2, . . . , 50} is the particle’s position at time step r
discretized into one of 50 locations. The total number of possible trajectories in this setting
is 5050, and we will be modeling 25050 possible sets of trajectories. We deﬁne positional and
transitional factors
F = {{r} | r = 1, 2, . . . , 50} ∪{{r −1, r} | r = 2, 3, . . . , 50} .
(224)
While a real tracking problem would involve quality scores q(y) that depend on some
observations—for example, measurements over time from a set of physical sensors, or perhaps
a video feed from a basketball game—for simplicity we determine the quality of a trajectory
here using only its starting position and a measure of smoothness over time. Speciﬁcally, we
have
q(y) = q1(y1)
50
Y
r=2
q(yr−1, yr) ,
(225)
where the initial quality score q1(y1) is given by a smooth trimodal function with a primary
mode at position 25 and secondary modes at positions 10 and 40, depicted by the blue
curves on the left side of Figure 17, and the quality scores for all other positional factors
are ﬁxed to one and have no eﬀect. The transition quality is the same at all time steps,
and given by q(yr−1, yr) = fN (yr−1 −yr), where fN is the density function of the normal
distribution; that is, the quality of a transition is maximized when the particle does not
change location, and decreases as the particle moves further and further from its previous
location. In essence, high quality paths start near the central position and move smoothly
through time.
We want trajectories to be considered similar if they travel through similar positions, so
77

10
20
30
40
50
10
20
30
40
50
10
20
30
40
50
10
20
30
40
50
10
20
30
40
50
10
20
30
40
50
Sampled particle trajectories (position vs. time)
10
20
30
40
50
10
20
30
40
50
10
20
30
40
50
10
20
30
40
50
10
20
30
40
50
10
20
30
40
50
Figure 17: Sets of particle trajectories sampled from an SDPP (top row) and independently
using only quality scores (bottom row). The curves to the left indicate quality scores for the
initial positions of the particles.
we deﬁne a 50-dimensional diversity feature vector as follows:
φ(y) =
50
X
r=1
φr(yr)
(226)
φrl(yr) ∝fN (l −yr),
l = 1, 2, . . . , 50 .
(227)
Intuitively, feature l is activated when the trajectory passes near position l, so trajectories
passing through nearby positions will activate the same features and thus appear similar in
the diversity model. Note that for simplicity, the time at which a particle reaches a given
position has no eﬀect on the diversity features. The diversity features for the transitional
factors are zero and have no eﬀect.
We use the quality and diversity models speciﬁed above to deﬁne our SDPP. In order to
obtain good results for visualization, we scale the kernel so that the expected number of
trajectories in a sample from the SDPP is ﬁve. We then apply the algorithms developed
later to draw samples from the model. The ﬁrst row of Figure 17 shows the results, and
for comparison each corresponding panel on the second row shows an equal number of
trajectories sampled independently, with probabilities proportional to their quality scores.
As evident from the ﬁgure, trajectories sampled independently tend to cluster in the middle
region due to the strong preference for this starting position. The SDPP samples, however,
are more diverse, tending to cover more of the space while still respecting the quality
scores—they are still smooth, and still tend to start near the center.
78

6.2
Second-order message passing
The central computational challenge for SDPPs is the fact that N = MR is exponentially
large, making the usual inference algorithms intractable. However, we showed in Section 3.3
that DPP inference can be recast in terms of a smaller dual representation C; recall that, if
B is the D × N matrix whose columns are given by Byi = q(yi)φ(yi), then L = B⊤B and
C = BB⊤
(228)
=
X
y∈Y
q2(y)φ(y)φ(y)⊤.
(229)
Of course, for the dual representation to be of any use we must be able to eﬃciently
compute C. If we think of q2
α(yα) as the factor potentials of a graphical model p(y) ∝
Q
α∈F q2
α(yα), then computing C is equivalent to computing second moments of the diversity
features under p (up to normalization). Since the diversity features factor additively, C
is quadratic in the local diversity features φα(yα). Thus, we could naively calculate C by
computing the pairwise marginals p(yα, yα′) for all realizations of the factors α, α′ and, by
linearity of expectations, adding up their contributions:
C ∝
X
α,α′
X
yα,yα′
p(yα, yα′)φα(yα)φα′(yα′)⊤,
(230)
where the proportionality is due to the normalizing constant of p(y). However, this sum
is quadratic in the number of factors and their possible realizations, and can therefore be
expensive when structures are large.
Instead, we can substitute the factorization from Equation (223) into Equation (229) to
obtain
C =
X
y∈Y
 Y
α∈F
q2
α(yα)
! X
α∈F
φα(yα)
! X
α∈F
φα(yα)
!⊤
.
(231)
It turns out that this expression is computable in linear time using a second-order message
passing algorithm.
Second-order message passing was ﬁrst introduced by Li and Eisner [2009]. The main
idea is to compute second-order statistics over a graphical model by using the standard belief
propagation message passing algorithm, but with a special semiring in place of the usual
sum-product or max-product. This substitution makes it possible to compute quantities of
the form
X
y∈Y
 Y
α∈F
pα(yα)
! X
α∈F
aα(yα)
! X
α∈F
bα(yα)
!
,
(232)
where pα are nonnegative and aα and bα are arbitrary functions. Note that we can think of
pα as deﬁning a multiplicatively decomposed function
p(y) =
Y
α∈F
pα(yα) ,
(233)
and aα and bα as deﬁning corresponding additively decomposed functions a and b.
79

y1
y2
y3
· · ·
yR
Figure 18: A sample factor graph for the tracking problem. Variable nodes are circular, and
factor nodes are square. Positional factors that depend only on a single part appear in the
top row; binary transitional factors appear between parts in the second row.
We begin by deﬁning the notion of a factor graph, which provides the structure for all
message passing algorithms. We then describe standard belief propagation on factor graphs,
and show how it can be deﬁned in a general way using semirings. Finally we demonstrate
that belief propagation using the semiring proposed by Li and Eisner [2009] computes
quantities of the form in Equation (232).
6.2.1
Factor graphs
Message passing operates on factor graphs. A factor graph is an undirected bipartite graph
with two types of vertices: variable nodes and factor nodes. Variable nodes correspond to the
parts of the structure being modeled; for the SDPP setup described above, a factor graph
contains R variable nodes, each associated with a distinct part r. Similarly, each factor
node corresponds to a distinct factor α ∈F. Every edge in the graph connects a variable
node to a factor node, and an edge exists between variable node r and factor node α if and
only if r ∈α. Thus, the factor graph encodes the relationships between parts and factors.
Figure 18 shows an example factor graph for the tracking problem from Section 6.1.1.
It is obvious that the computation of Equation (232) cannot be eﬃcient when factors
are allowed to be arbitrary, since in the limit a factor could contain all parts and we could
assign arbitrary values to every conﬁguration y. Thus we will assume that the degree of the
factor nodes is bounded by a constant c. (In Figure 18, as well as all of the experiments
we run, we have c = 2.) Furthermore, message passing algorithms are eﬃcient whenever
the factor graph has low treewidth, or, roughly, when only small sets of nodes need to be
merged to obtain a tree. Going forward we will assume that the factor graph is a tree, since
any low-treewidth factor graph can be converted into an equivalent factor tree with bounded
factors using the junction tree algorithm [Lauritzen and Spiegelhalter, 1988].
6.2.2
Belief propagation
We now describe the basic belief propagation algorithm, ﬁrst introduced by Pearl [1982].
Suppose each factor has an associated real-valued weight function wα(yα), giving rise to the
multiplicatively decomposed global weight function
w(y) =
Y
α∈F
wα(yα) .
(234)
Then the goal of belief propagation is to eﬃciently compute sums of w(y) over combinatorially
large sets of structures y.
80

We will refer to a structure y as an assignment to the variable nodes of the factor graph,
since it deﬁnes a value yr for every part. Likewise we can think of yα as an assignment
to the variable nodes adjacent to α, and yr as an assignment to a single variable node r.
We use the notation yα ∼yr to indicate that yα is consistent with yr, in the sense that it
assigns the same value to variable node r. Finally, denote by F(r) the set of factors in which
variable r participates.
The belief propagation algorithm deﬁnes recursive message functions m to be passed
along edges of the factor graph; the formula for the message depends on whether it is
traveling from a variable node to a factor node, or vice versa:
• From a variable r to a factor α:
mr→α(yr) =
Y
α′∈F(r)−{α}
mα′→r(yr)
(235)
• From a factor α to a variable r:
mα→r(yr) =
X
yα∼yr

wα(yα)
Y
r′∈α−{r}
mr′→α(yr′)


(236)
Intuitively, an outgoing message summarizes all of the messages arriving at the source node,
excluding the one coming from the target node. Messages from factor nodes additionally
incorporate information about the local weight function.
Belief propagation passes these messages in two phases based on an arbitrary orientation
of the factor tree. In the ﬁrst phase, called the forward pass, messages are passed upwards
from the leaves to the root. In the second phase, or backward pass, the messages are passed
downward, from the root to the leaves. Upon completion of the second phase one message
has been passed in each direction along every edge in the factor graph, and it is possible to
prove using an inductive argument that, for every yr,
Y
α∈F(r)
mα→t(yr) =
X
y∼yr
Y
α∈F
wα(yα) .
(237)
If we think of the wα as potential functions, then Equation (237) gives the (unnormalized)
marginal probability of the assignment yr under a Markov random ﬁeld.
Note that the algorithm passes two messages per edge in the factor graph, and each
message requires considering at most Mc assignments, therefore its running time is O(McR).
The sum on the right-hand side of Equation (237), however, is exponential in the number of
parts. Thus belief propagation oﬀers an eﬃcient means of computing certain combinatorial
quantities that would naively require exponential time.
6.2.3
Semirings
In fact, the belief propagation algorithm can be easily generalized to operate over an arbitrary
semiring, thus allowing the same basic algorithm to perform a variety of useful computations.
Recall that a semiring ⟨W, ⊕, ⊗, 0, 1⟩comprises a set of elements W, an addition operator ⊕,
a multiplication operator ⊗, an additive identity 0, and a multiplicative identity 1 satisfying
the following requirements for all a, b, c ∈W:
81

• Addition is associative and commutative, with identity 0:
a ⊕(b ⊕c) = (a ⊕b) ⊕c
(238)
a ⊕b = b ⊕a
(239)
a ⊕0 = a
(240)
• Multiplication is associative, with identity 1:
a ⊗(b ⊗c) = (a ⊗b) ⊗c
(241)
a ⊗1 = 1 ⊗a = a
(242)
• Multiplication distributes over addition:
a ⊗(b ⊕c) = (a ⊗b) ⊕(a ⊗c)
(243)
(a ⊕b) ⊗c = (a ⊗c) ⊕(b ⊗c)
(244)
• 0 is absorbing under multiplication:
a ⊗0 = 0 ⊗a = 0
(245)
Obviously these requirements are met when W = R and multiplication and addition are the
usual arithmetic operations; this is the standard sum-product semiring. We also have, for
example, the max-product semiring, where W = [0, ∞), addition is given by the maximum
operator with identity element 0, and multiplication is as before.
We can rewrite the messages deﬁned by belief propagation in terms of these more general
operations. For wα(yα) ∈W, we have
mr→α(yr) =
O
α′∈F(r)−{α}
mα′→r(yr)
(246)
mα→r(yr) =
M
yα∼yr

wα(yα) ⊗
O
r′∈α−{r}
mr′→α(yr′)

.
(247)
As before, we can pass messages forward and then backward through the factor tree.
Because the properties of semirings are suﬃcient to preserve the inductive argument, we
then have the following analog of Equation (237):
O
α∈F(r)
mα→r(yr) =
M
y∼yr
O
α∈F
wα(yα) .
(248)
We have seen that Equation (248) computes marginal probabilities under the sum-product
semiring, but other semirings give rise to useful results as well. Under the max-product
semiring, for instance, Equation (248) is the so-called max-marginal—the maximum unnor-
malized probability of any single assignment y consistent with yr. In the next section we
take this one step further, and show how a carefully designed semiring will allow us to sum
second-order quantities across exponentially many structures y.
82

6.2.4
Second-order semiring
Li and Eisner [2009] proposed the following second-order semiring over four-tuples (q, φ, ψ, c) ∈
W = R4:
(q1, φ1, ψ1, c1) ⊕(q2, φ2, ψ2, c2) = (q1 + q2, φ1 + φ2, ψ1 + ψ2, c1 + c2)
(249)
(q1, φ1, ψ1, c1) ⊗(q2, φ2, ψ2, c2) = (q1q2, q1φ2 + q2φ1, q1ψ2 + q2ψ1,
q1c2 + q2c1 + φ1ψ2 + φ2ψ1)
(250)
0 = (0, 0, 0, 0)
(251)
1 = (1, 0, 0, 0)
(252)
It is easy to verify that the semiring properties hold for these operations. Now, suppose that
the weight function for a factor α is given by
wα(yα) = (pα(yα), pα(yα)aα(yα), pα(yα)bα(yα), pα(yα)aα(yα)bα(yα)) ,
(253)
where pα, aα, and bα are as before. Then wα(yα) ∈W, and we can get some intuition about
the multiplication operator by observing that the fourth component of wα(yα) ⊗wα′(yα′) is
pα(yα) [pα′(yα′)aα′(yα′)bα′(yα′)] + pα′(yα′) [pα(yα)aα(yα)bα(yα)]
+ [pα(yα)aα(yα)] [pα′(yα′)bα′(yα′)] + [pα′(yα′)aα′(yα′)] [pα(yα)bα(yα)]
(254)
= pα(yα)pα′(yα′) [aα(yα) + aα′(yα′)] [bα(yα) + bα′(yα′)] .
(255)
In other words, multiplication in the second-order semiring combines the values of p multi-
plicatively and the values of a and b additively, leaving the result in the fourth component.
It is not hard to extend this argument inductively and show that the fourth component of
N
α∈F wα(yα) is given in general by
 Y
α∈F
pα(yα)
! X
α∈F
aα(yα)
! X
α∈F
bα(yα)
!
.
(256)
Thus, by Equation (248) and the deﬁnition of ⊕, belief propagation with the second-order
semiring yields messages that satisfy

O
α∈F(r)
mα→r(yr)


4
=
X
y∼yr
 Y
α∈F
pα(yα)
! X
α∈F
aα(yα)
! X
α∈F
bα(yα)
!
.
(257)
Note that multiplication and addition remain constant-time operations in the second-order
semiring, thus belief propagation can still be performed in time linear in the number of
factors. In the following section we will show that the dual representation C, as well as
related quantities needed to perform inference in SDPPs, takes the form of Equation (257);
thus second-order message passing will be an important tool for eﬃcient SDPP inference.
83

6.3
Inference
The factorization proposed in Equation (223) gives a concise deﬁnition of a structured DPP
for an exponentially large Y; remarkably, under suitable conditions it also gives rise to
tractable algorithms for normalizing the SDPP, computing marginals, and sampling. The
only restrictions necessary for eﬃciency are the ones we inherit from belief propagation: the
factors must be of bounded size so that we can enumerate all of their possible conﬁgurations,
and together they must form a low-treewidth graph on the parts of the structure. These
are precisely the same conditions needed for eﬃcient graphical model inference [Koller and
Friedman, 2009], which is generalized by inference in SDPPs.
6.3.1
Computing C
As we saw in Section 3.3, the dual representation C is suﬃcient to normalize and marginalize
an SDPP in time constant in N. Recall from Equation (231) that the dual representation of
an SDPP can be written as
C =
X
y∈Y
 Y
α∈F
q2
α(yα)
! X
α∈F
φα(yα)
! X
α∈F
φα(yα)
!⊤
,
(258)
which is of the form required to apply second-order message passing. Speciﬁcally, we can
compute for each pair of diversity features (a, b) the value of
X
y∈Y
 Y
α∈F
q2
α(yα)
! X
α∈F
φαa(yα)
! X
α∈F
φαb(yα)
!
(259)
by summing Equation (257) over the possible assignments yr, and then simply assemble the
results into the matrix C. Since there are D(D+1)
2
unique entries in C and message passing
runs in time O(McR), computing C in this fashion requires O(D2McR) time.
We can make several practical optimizations to this algorithm, though they will not aﬀect
the asymptotic performance. First, we note that the full set of messages at any variable
node r is suﬃcient to compute Equation (259). Thus, during message passing we need only
perform the forward pass; at that point, the messages at the root node are complete and we
can obtain the quantity we need. This speeds up the algorithm by a factor of two. Second,
rather than running message passing D2 times, we can run it only once using a vectorized
second-order semiring. This has no eﬀect on the total number of operations, but can result
in signiﬁcantly faster performance due to vector optimizations in modern processors. The
vectorized second-order semiring is over four-tuples (q, φ, ψ, C) where q ∈R, φ, ψ ∈RD, and
C ∈RD×D, and uses the following operations:
(q1, φ1, ψ1, C1) ⊕(q2, φ2, ψ2, C2) = (q1 + q2, φ1 + φ2, ψ1 + ψ2, C1 + C2)
(260)
(q1, φ1, ψ1, C1) ⊗(q2, φ2, ψ2, C2) = (q1q2, q1φ2 + q2φ1, q1ψ2 + q2ψ1,
q1C2 + q2C1 + φ1ψ⊤
2 + φ2ψ⊤
1 )
(261)
0 = (0, 0, 0, 0)
(262)
1 = (1, 0, 0, 0) .
(263)
84

It is easy to verify that computations in this vectorized semiring are identical to those
obtained by repeated use of the scalar semiring.
Given C, we can now normalize and compute marginals for an SDPP using the formulas
in Section 3.3; for instance
Kii =
D
X
n=1
λn
λn + 1

1
√λn
B⊤
i ˆvn
2
(264)
= q2(yi)
D
X
n=1
1
λn + 1(φ(yi)⊤ˆvn)2 ,
(265)
where C = PD
n=1 λnˆvnˆv⊤
n is an eigendecomposition of C.
Part marginals
The introduction of structure oﬀers an alternative type of marginal
probability, this time not of structures y ∈Y but of single part assignments. More precisely,
we can ask how many of the structures in a sample from the SDPP can be expected to make
the assignment ˆyr to part r:
µr(ˆyr) = E

X
y∈Y
I(y ∈Y ∧yr = ˆyr)


(266)
=
X
y∼ˆyr
PL(y ∈Y ) .
(267)
The sum is exponential, but we can compute it eﬃciently using second-order message passing.
We apply Equation (265) to get
X
y∼ˆyr
PL(y ∈Y ) =
X
y∼ˆyr
q2(y)
D
X
n=1
1
λn + 1(φ(y)⊤ˆvn)2
(268)
=
D
X
n=1
1
λn + 1
X
y∼ˆyr
q2(y)(φ(y)⊤ˆvn)2
(269)
=
D
X
n=1
1
λn + 1
X
y∼ˆyr
 Y
α∈F
q2
α(yα)
! X
α∈F
φα(yα)⊤ˆvn
!2
.
(270)
The result is a sum of D terms, each of which takes the form of Equation (257), and therefore
is eﬃciently computable by message passing. The desired part marginal probability simply
requires D separate applications of belief propagation, one per eigenvector ˆvn, for a total
runtime of O(D2McR). (It is also possible to vectorize this computation and use a single
run of belief propagation.) Note that if we require the marginal for only a single part µr(ˆyr),
we can run just the forward pass if we root the factor tree at part node r. However, by
running both passes we obtain everything we need to compute the part marginals for any r
and ˆyr; the asymptotic time required to compute all part marginals is the same as the time
required to compute just one.
85

6.3.2
Sampling
While the dual representation provides useful algorithms for normalization and marginals,
the dual sampling algorithm is linear in N; for SDPPs, this is too slow to be useful. In order
to make SDPP sampling practical, we need to be able to eﬃciently choose a structure yi
according to the distribution
Pr(yi) =
1
| ˆV |
X
ˆv∈ˆV
(ˆv⊤Bi)2
(271)
in the ﬁrst line of the while loop in Algorithm 3. We can use the deﬁnition of B to obtain
Pr(yi) =
1
| ˆV |
X
ˆv∈ˆV
q2(yi)(ˆv⊤φ(yi))2
(272)
=
1
| ˆV |
X
ˆv∈ˆV
 Y
α∈F
q2
α(yiα)
! X
α∈F
ˆv⊤φα(yiα)
!2
.
(273)
Thus, the desired distribution has the familiar form of Equation (257). For instance, the
marginal probability of part r taking the assignment ˆyr is given by
1
| ˆV |
X
ˆv∈ˆV
X
y∼ˆyr
 Y
α∈F
q2
α(yα)
! X
α∈F
ˆv⊤φα(yα)
!2
,
(274)
which we can compute with k = | ˆV | runs of belief propagation (or a single vectorized run),
taking only O(DMcRk) time. More generally, the message-passing computation of these
marginals oﬀers an eﬃcient algorithm for sampling individual full structures yi. We will
ﬁrst show a naive method based on iterated computation of conditional marginals, and then
use it to derive a more eﬃcient algorithm by integrating the sampling of parts into the
message-passing process.
Single structure sampling
Returning to the factor graph used for belief propagation
(see Section 6.2.1), we can force a part r′ to take a certain assignment yr′ by adding a
new singleton factor containing only r′, and setting its weight function to 1 for yr′ and 0
otherwise. (In practice, we do not need to actually create a new factor; we can simply set
outgoing messages from variable r′ to 0 for all but the desired assignment yr′.) It is easy to
see that Equation (248) becomes
O
α∈F(r)
mα→r(yr) =
M
y∼yr,yr′
O
α∈F
wα(yα) ,
(275)
where the sum is now doubly constrained, since any assignment y that is not consistent with
yr′ introduces a 0 into the product. If N
α∈F wα(yα) gives rise to a probability measure over
structures y, then Equation (275) can be seen as the unnormalized conditional marginal
86

Algorithm 9 Sampling a structure (naive)
Input: factored q and φ, ˆv
S ←∅
for r = 1, 2, . . . , R do
Run second-order belief propagation with:
• p = q2
• a = b = ˆv⊤φ
• assignments in S held ﬁxed
Sample yr according to Pr(yr|S) ∝
hN
α∈F(r) mα→r(yr)
i
4
S ←S ∪{yr}
end for
Output: y constructed from S
probability of the assignment yr given yr′. For example, using the second-order semiring
with p = q2 and a = b = ˆv⊤φ, we have

O
α∈F(r)
mα→r(yr)


4
=
X
y∼yr,yr′
 Y
α∈F
q2
α(yα)
! X
α∈F
ˆv⊤φα(yα)
!2
.
(276)
Summing these values for all ˆv ∈ˆV and normalizing the result yields the conditional
distribution of yr given ﬁxed assignment yr′ under Equation (273). Going forward we will
assume for simplicity that ˆV contains a single vector ˆv; however, the general case is easily
handled by maintaining | ˆV | messages in parallel, or by vectorizing the computation.
The observation that we can compute conditional probabilities with certain assignments
held ﬁxed gives rise to a naive algorithm for sampling a structure according to Pr(yi) in
Equation (273), shown in Algorithm 9. While polynomial, Algorithm 9 requires running
belief propagation R times, which might be prohibitively expensive for large structures. We
can do better by weaving the sampling steps into a single run of belief propagation. We
discuss ﬁrst how this can be done for linear factor graphs, where the intuition is simpler,
and then extend it to general factor trees.
Linear graphs
Suppose that the factor graph is a linear chain arranged from left to right.
Each node in the graph has at most two neighbors—one to the left, and one to the right.
Assume the belief propagation forward pass proceeds from left to right, and the backward
pass from right to left. To send a message to the right, a node needs only to receive its
message from the left. Conversely, to send a message to the left, only the message from the
right is needed. Thus, the forward and backward passes can be performed independently.
Consider now the execution of Algorithm 9 on this factor graph. Assume the variable
nodes are numbered in decreasing order from left to right, so the variable sampled in the ﬁrst
iteration is the rightmost variable node. Observe that on iteration r, we do not actually need
to run belief propagation to completion; we need only the messages incoming to variable
node r, since those suﬃce to compute the (conditional) marginals for part r. To obtain
those messages, we must compute all of the forward messages sent from the left of variable
r, and the backward messages from the right. Call this set of messages m(r).
87

m(r −1):
m(r):
· · ·
yr+1
yr
yr−1
· · ·
· · ·
yr+1
yr
yr−1
· · ·
*
*
Figure 19: Messages on a linear chain. Only the starred messages need to be computed
to obtain m(r) from m(r −1). The double circle indicates that assignment yr−1 has been
ﬁxed for computing m(r).
Note that m(1) is just a full, unconstrained forward pass, which can be computed in
time O(DMcR). Now compare m(r) to m(r −1). Between iteration r −1 and r, the only
change to S is that variable r −1, to the right of variable r, has been assigned. Therefore the
forward messages in m(r), which come from the left, do not need to be recomputed, as they
are a subset of the forward messages in m(r −1). Likewise, the backward messages sent
from the right of variable r −1 are unchanged, so they do not need to be recomputed. The
only new messages in m(r) are those backward messages traveling from r −1 to r. These
can be computed, using m(r −1) and the sampled assignment yr−1, in constant time. See
Figure 19 for an illustration of this process.
Thus, rather than restarting belief propagation on each loop of Algorithm 9, we have
shown that we need only compute a small number of additional messages. In essence we
have threaded the sampling of parts r into the backward pass. After completing the forward
pass, we sample y1; we then compute the backward messages from y1 to y2, sample y2,
and so on. When the backward pass is complete, we sample the ﬁnal assignment yR and
are ﬁnished. Since the initial forward pass takes O(DMcR) time and each of the O(R)
subsequent iterations takes at most O(DMc) time, we can sample from Pr(yi) over a linear
graph in O(DMcR) time.
Trees
The algorithm described above for linear graphs can be generalized to arbitrary
factor trees. For standard graphical model sampling using the sum-product semiring, the
generalization is straightforward—we can simply pass messages up to the root and then
sample on the backward pass from the root to the leaves. However, for arbitrary semirings
this is algorithm is incorrect, since an assignment to one node can aﬀect the messages
arriving at its siblings even when the parent’s assignment is ﬁxed.
Let mb→a(·|S) be the message function sent from node b to node a during a run of belief
propagation where the assignments in S have been held ﬁxed. Imagine that we re-root the
factor tree with a as the root; then deﬁne Ta(b) to be the subtree rooted at b (see Figure 20).
88

Ta(b)
a
d
...
...
b
c1
c2
mb→a(·|S)
Figure 20: Notation for factor trees, including mb→a(·|S) and Ta(b) when a is a (square)
factor node and b is a (round) variable node. The same deﬁnitions apply when a is a variable
and b is a factor.
Several useful observations follow.
Lemma 6.1. If b1 and b2 are distinct neighbors of a, then Ta(b1) and Ta(b2) are disjoint.
Proof. The claim is immediate, since the underlying graph is a tree.
Lemma 6.2. mb→a(·|S) can be computed given only the messages mc→b(·|S) for all neighbors
c̸ = a of b and either the weight function wb (if b is a factor node) or the assignment to b in
S (if b is a variable node and such an assignment exists).
Proof. Follows from the message deﬁnitions in Equations (246) and (247).
Lemma 6.3. mb→a(·|S) depends only on the assignments in S that give values to variables
in Ta(b).
Proof. If b is a leaf (that is, its only neighbor is a), the lemma holds trivially. If b is not
a leaf, then assume inductively that incoming messages mc→b(·|S), c̸ = a, depend only on
assignments to variables in Tb(c). By Lemma 6.2, the message mb→a(·|S) depends only on
those messages and (possibly) the assignment to b in S. Since b and Tb(c) are subgraphs of
Ta(b), the claim follows.
To sample a structure, we begin by initializing S0 = ∅and setting messages ˆmb→a =
mb→a(·|S0) for all neighbor pairs (a, b). This can be done in O(DMcR) time via belief
propagation.
Now we walk the graph, sampling assignments and updating the current messages ˆmb→a
as we go. Step t from node b to a proceeds in three parts as follows:
1. Check whether b is a variable node without an assignment in St−1. If so, sample an
assignment yb using the current incoming messages ˆmc→b, and set St = St−1 ∪{yb}.
Otherwise set St = St−1.
89

2. Recompute and update ˆmb→a using the current messages and Equations (246) and (247),
taking into account any assignment to b in St.
3. Advance to node a.
This simple algorithm has the following useful invariant.
Theorem 6.4. Following step t from b to a, for every neighbor d of a we have
ˆmd→a = md→a(·|St) .
(277)
Proof. By design, the theorem holds at the outset of the walk. Suppose inductively that
the claim is true for steps 1, 2, . . . , t −1. Let t′ be the most recent step prior to t at which
we visited a, or 0 if step t was our ﬁrst visit to a. Since the graph is a tree, we know that
between steps t′ and t the walk remained entirely within Ta(b). Hence the only assignments
in St −St′ are to variables in Ta(b). As a result, for all neighbors d̸ = b of a we have
ˆmd→a = md→a(·|St′) = md→a(·|St) by the inductive hypothesis, Lemma 6.1, and Lemma 6.3.
It remains to show that ˆmb→a = mb→a(·|Si). For all neighbors c̸ = a of b, we know that
ˆmc→b = mc→b(·|Si−1) = mc→b(·|St) due to the inductive hypothesis and Lemma 6.3 (since b
is not in Tb(c)). By Lemma 6.2, then, we have ˆmb→a = mb→a(·|St).
Theorem 6.4 guarantees that whenever we sample an assignment for the current variable node
in the ﬁrst part of step t, we sample from the conditional marginal distribution Pr(yb|St−1).
Therefore, we can sample a complete structure from the distribution Pr(y) if we walk the
entire tree. This can be done, for example, by starting at the root and proceeding in
depth-ﬁrst order. Such a walk takes O(R) steps, and each step requires computing only
a single message. Thus, allowing now for k = | ˆV | > 1, we can sample a structure in time
O(DMcRk), a signiﬁcant improvement over Algorithm 9. The procedure is summarized in
Algorithm 10.
Algorithm 10 is the ﬁnal piece of machinery needed to replicate the DPP sampling
algorithm using the dual representation.
The full SDPP sampling process is given in
Algorithm 11 and runs in time O(D2k3 + DMcRk2), where k is the number of eigenvectors
selected in the ﬁrst loop. As in standard DPP sampling, the asymptotically most expensive
operation is the orthonormalization; here we require O(D2) time to compute each of the
O(k2) dot products.
6.4
Experiments: pose estimation
To demonstrate that SDPPs eﬀectively model characteristics of real-world data, we apply
them to a multiple-person pose estimation task [Kulesza and Taskar, 2010]. Our input will
be a still image depicting multiple people, and our goal is to simultaneously identify the
poses—the positions of the torsos, heads, and left and right arms—of all the people in the
image. A pose y is therefore a structure with four parts, in this case literally body parts. To
form a complete structure, each part r is assigned a position/orientation pair yr. Our quality
model will be based on “part detectors” trained to estimate the likelihood of a particular
body part at a particular location and orientation; thus we will focus on identifying poses
90

Algorithm 10 Sampling a structure
Input: factored q and φ, ˆv
S ←∅
Initialize ˆma→b using second-order belief propagation with p = q2, a = b = ˆv⊤φ
Let a1, a2, . . . , aT be a traversal of the factor tree
for t = 1, 2, . . . , T do
if at is a variable node r with no assignment in S then
Sample yr according to Pr(yr) ∝
hN
α∈F(r) ˆmα→r(yr)
i
4
S ←S ∪{yr}
end if
if t < T then
Update ˆmat→at+1 using Equations (246) and (247), ﬁxing assignments in S
end if
end for
Output: y constructed from S
that correspond well to the image itself. Our similarity model, on the other hand, will focus
on the location of a pose within the image. Since the part detectors often have uncertainty
about the precise location of a part, there may be many variations of a single pose that
outscore the poses of all the other, less detectable people. An independent model would
thus be likely to choose many similar poses. By encouraging the model to choose a spatially
diverse set of poses, we hope to improve the chance that the model predicts a single pose for
each person.
Our dataset consists of 73 still frames taken from various TV shows, each approximately
720 by 540 pixels in size [Sapp et al., 2010]3. As much as possible, the selected frames
contain three or more people at similar scale, all facing the camera and without serious
occlusions. Sample images from the dataset are shown in Figure 22. Each person in each
image is annotated by hand; each of the four parts (head, torso, right arm, and left arm) is
labeled with the pixel location of a reference point (e.g., the shoulder) and an orientation
selected from among 24 discretized angles.
6.4.1
Factorized model
There are approximately 75,000 possible values for each part, so there are about 475,000
possible poses, and thus we cannot reasonably use a standard DPP for this problem. Instead,
we build a factorized SDPP. Our factors are given by the standard pictorial structure model
[Felzenszwalb and Huttenlocher, 2005, Fischler and Elschlager, 1973], treating each pose
as a two-level tree with the torso as the root and the head and arms as leaves. Each node
(body part) has a singleton factor, and each edge has a corresponding pairwise factor.
Our quality function derives from the model proposed by Sapp et al. [2010], and is given
3The images and code were obtained from http://www.vision.grasp.upenn.edu/video
91

Algorithm 11 Sampling from an SDPP
Input: eigendecomposition {(ˆvn, λn)}D
n=1 of C
J ←∅
for n = 1, 2, . . . , N do
J ←J ∪{n} with prob.
λn
λn+1
end for
ˆV ←

ˆvn
√
ˆv⊤
n Cˆvn

n∈J
Y ←∅
while | ˆV | > 0 do
Select yi from Y with Pr(yi) =
1
| ˆV |
P
ˆv∈ˆV ((B⊤ˆv)⊤ei)2 (Algorithm 10)
Y ←Y ∪yi
ˆV ←ˆV⊥, where {B⊤ˆv | ˆv ∈ˆV⊥} is an orthonormal basis for the subspace of V
orthogonal to ei
end while
Output: Y
by
q(y) = γ


R
Y
r=1
qr(yr)
Y
(r,r′)∈E
qr,r′(yr, yr′)


β
,
(278)
where E is the set of edges in the part tree, γ is a scale parameter that will control the
expected number of poses in an SDPP sample, and β is a sharpness parameter that controls
the dynamic range of the quality scores. We set the values of the hyperparameters γ and
β using a held-out training set, as discussed below. The per-part quality scores qr(yr) are
provided by the customized part detectors trained by Sapp et al. [2010] on similar images;
they assign a value to every proposed location and orientation yr of part r. The pairwise
quality scores qr,r′(yr, yr′) are deﬁned according to a Gaussian “spring” that encourages, for
example, the left arm to begin near the left shoulder of the torso. Full details of the model
are provided in Sapp et al. [2010].
In order to encourage the model not to choose overlapping poses, our diversity features
reﬂect the locations of the constituent parts:
φ(y) =
R
X
r=1
φr(yr) ,
(279)
where each φr(yr) ∈R32. There are no diversity features on the edge factors. The local
features are based on a 8 × 4 grid of reference points x1, x2, . . . , x32 spaced evenly across the
image; the lth feature is
φrl(yr) ∝fN
dist(yr, xl)
σ

.
(280)
Here fN is again the standard normal density function, and dist(yr, xl) is the Euclidean
distance between the position of part r (ignoring orientation) and the reference point xl.
Poses that occupy the same part of the image will be near the same reference points, and
92

thus their feature vectors φ will be more closely aligned. The parameter σ controls the width
of the kernel; larger values of σ make poses at a given distance appear more similar We set
σ on a held-out training set.
6.4.2
Methods
We compare samples from the SDPP deﬁned above to those from two baseline methods.
The ﬁrst, which we call the independent model, draws poses independently according to the
distribution obtained by normalizing the quality scores, which is essentially the graphical
model used by Sapp et al. [2010]. For this model the number of poses to be sampled must
be supplied by the user, so to create a level playing ﬁeld we choose the number of poses
in an SDPP sample Y . Since this approach does not incorporate a notion of diversity (or
any correlations between selected poses whatsoever), we expect that we will frequently see
multiple poses that correspond to the same person.
The second baseline is a simple non-maximum suppression model [Canny, 1986], which
incorporates a heuristic for encouraging diversity. The ﬁrst pose is drawn from the normalized
quality model in the same manner as for the independent method. Subsequent poses, however,
are constrained so that they cannot overlap with the previously selected poses, but otherwise
drawn according to the quality model. We consider poses overlapping if they cover any
of the same pixels when rendered. Again, the number of poses must be provided as an
argument, so we use the number of poses from a sample of the SDPP. While the non-max
approach can no longer generate multiple poses in the same location, it achieves this using a
hard, heuristic constraint. Thus, we might expect to perform poorly when multiple people
actually do overlap in the image, for example if one stands behind the other.
The SDPP, on the other hand, generates samples that prefer, but do not require poses
to be spatially diverse. That is, strong visual information in the image can override our
prior assumptions about the separation of distinct poses. We split our data randomly into a
training set of 13 images and a test set of 60 images. Using the training set, we select values
for γ, β, and σ that optimize overall F1 score at radius 100 (see below), as well as distinct
optimal values of β for the baselines. (γ and σ are irrelevant for the baselines.) We then use
each model to sample 10 sets of poses for each test image, for a total of 600 samples per
model.
6.4.3
Results
For each sample from each of the three tested methods, we compute measures of precision
and recall as well as an F1 score. In our tests, precision is measured as the fraction of
predicted parts for which both endpoints are within a given radius of the endpoints of an
expert-labeled part of the same type (head, left arm, and so on). We report results across a
range of radii. Correspondingly, recall is the fraction of expert-labeled parts with endpoints
within a given radius of a predicted part of the same type. Since the SDPP model encourages
diversity, we expect to see improvements in recall at the expense of precision, compared to
the independent model. F1 score is the harmonic mean of precision and recall. We compute
all metrics separately for each sample, and then average the results across samples and
images in the test set.
93

40
60
80
100
120
140
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4
0.5
0.6
Match radius (in pixels)
Overall F1
 
 
SDPP
Non−max
Indep.
(a)
40
60
80
100
120
140
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4
0.5
0.6
Match radius (in pixels)
Arms F1
(b)
40
60
80
100
120
140
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
Match radius (in pixels)
Precision / recall (circles)
(c)
Figure 21: Results for pose estimation. The horizontal axis gives the acceptance radius
used to determine whether two parts are successfully matched. 95% conﬁdence intervals are
shown. (a) Overall F1 scores. (b) Arm F1 scores. (c) Overall precision/recall curves (recall
is identiﬁed by circles).
The results are shown in Figure 21a. At tight tolerances, when the radius of acceptance
is small, the SDPP performs comparably to the independent and non-max samples, perhaps
because the quality scores are simply unreliable at this resolution, thus diversity has little
eﬀect. As the radius increases, however, the SDPP obtains better results, signiﬁcantly
outperforming both baselines. Figure 21b shows the curves for just the arm parts, which
tend to be more diﬃcult to locate accurately and exhibit greater variance in orientation.
Figure 21c shows the precision/recall obtained by each model. As expected, the SDPP
model achieves its improved F1 score by increasing recall at the cost of precision.
For illustration, we show the SDPP sampling process for some sample images from the
test set in Figure 22. The SDPP part marginals are visualized as a “cloud”, where brighter
colors correspond to higher probability. From left to right, we can see how the marginals
change as poses are selected during the main loop of Algorithm 11. As we saw for simple
synthetic examples in Figure 8a, the SDPP discounts but does not entirely preclude poses
that are similar to those already selected.
6.5
Random projections for SDPPs
It is quite remarkable that we can perform polynomial-time inference for SDPPs given
their extreme combinatorial nature. Even so, in some cases the algorithms presented in
Section 6.3 may not be fast enough. Eigendecomposing the dual representation C, for
instance, requires O(D3) time, while normalization, marginalization, and sampling, even
when an eigendecomposition has been precomputed, scale quadratically in D, both in terms
of time and memory. In practice, this limits us to relatively low-dimensional diversity
features φ; for example, in our pose estimation experiments we built φ from a fairly coarse
grid of 32 points mainly for reasons of eﬃciency. As we move to textual data, this will
become an even bigger problem, since there is no natural low-dimensional analog for feature
vectors based on, say, word occurrences. In the following section we will see data where
natural vectors φ have dimension D ≈30,000; without dimensionality reduction, storing
94

Figure 22: Structured marginals for the pose estimation task, visualized as clouds, on
successive steps of the sampling algorithm. Already selected poses are superimposed. Input
images are shown on the left.
95

even a single belief propagation message would require over 200 terabytes of memory.
To address this problem, we will make use of the random projection technique described
in Section 3.4, reducing the dimension of the diversity features without sacriﬁcing the
accuracy of the model. Because Theorem 3.3 depends on a cardinality condition, we will
focus on k-SDPPs. As described in Section 5, a k-DPP is simply a DPP conditioned on the
cardinality of the modeled subset Y :
Pk(Y ) =
Q
y∈Y q2(y)

det(φ(Y )⊤φ(Y ))
P
|Y ′|=k
Q
y∈Y q2(y)

det(φ(Y )⊤φ(Y ))
,
(281)
where φ(Y ) denotes the D × |Y | matrix formed from columns φ(y) for y ∈Y . When q and
φ factor over parts of a structure, as in Section 6.1, we will refer to this distribution as a
k-SDPP. We note in passing that the algorithms for normalization and sampling in Section 5
apply equally well to k-SDPPs, since they depend mainly on the eigenvalues of L, which we
can obtain from C.
Recall that Theorem 3.3 requires projection dimension
d = O(max{k/ϵ, (log(1/δ) + log N)/ϵ2}) .
(282)
In the structured setting, N = MR, thus d must be logarithmic in the number of labels and
linear in the number of parts. Under this condition, we have, with probability at least 1 −δ,
∥Pk −˜Pk∥1 ≤e6kϵ −1 ,
(283)
where ˜Pk(Y ) is the projected k-SDPP.
6.5.1
Toy example: geographical paths
In order to empirically study the eﬀects of random projections, we test them on a simple
toy application where D is small enough that the exact model is tractable. The goal is to
identify diverse, high-quality sets of travel routes between U.S. cities, where diversity is
with respect to geographical location, and quality is optimized by short paths visiting the
most populous or most touristy cities. Such sets of paths could be used, for example, by a
politician to plan campaign routes, or by a traveler organizing a series of vacations.
We model the problem as a k-SDPP over path structures having R = 4 parts, where
each part is a stop along the path and can take any of M = 200 city values. The quality
and diversity functions are factored, with a singleton factor for every individual stop and
pairwise factors for consecutive pairs of stops. The quality of a singleton factor is based
on the Google hit count for the assigned city, so that paths stopping in popular cities are
preferred. The quality of a pair of consecutive stops is based on the distance between the
assigned cities, so that short paths are preferred. In order to disallow paths that travel
back and forth between the same cities, we augment the stop assignments to include arrival
direction, and assign a quality score of zero to paths that return in the direction from which
they came. The diversity features are only deﬁned on the singleton factors; for a given city
assignment yr, φr(yr) is just the vector of inverse distances between yr and all of the 200
96

Figure 23: Each column shows two samples drawn from a k-SDPP; from left to right,
k = 2, 3, 4. Circle size corresponds to city quality.
cities. As a result, paths passing through the same or nearby cities appear similar, and the
model prefers paths that travel through diﬀerent regions of the country. We have D = 200.
Figure 23 shows sets of paths sampled from the k-SDPP for various values of k. For
k = 2, the model tends to choose one path along the east coast and another along the
west coast. As k increases, a variety of conﬁgurations emerge; however, they continue to
emphasize popular cities and the diﬀerent paths remain geographically diverse.
We can now investigate the eﬀects of random projections on this model. Figure 24 shows
the L1 variational distance between the original model and the projected model (estimated
by sampling), as well as the memory required to sample a set of paths for a variety of
projection dimensions d. As predicted by Theorem 3.3, only a relatively small number of
projection dimensions are needed to obtain a close approximation to the original model.
Past d ≈25, the rate of improvement due to increased dimension falls oﬀdramatically;
meanwhile, the required memory and running time start to become signiﬁcant. Figure 24
suggests that aggressive use of random projections, like those we employ in the following
section, is not only theoretically but also empirically justiﬁed.
6.6
Experiments: threading graphs
In this section we put together many of the techniques introduced in this paper in order to
complete a novel task that we refer to as graph threading [Gillenwater et al., 2012]. The goal
is to extract from a large directed graph a set of diverse, salient threads, or singly-connected
chains of nodes. Depending on the construction of the graph, such threads can have various
semantics. For example, given a corpus of academic literature, high-quality threads in the
citation graph might correspond to chronological chains of important papers, each building
on the work of the last. Thus, graph threading could be used to identify a set of signiﬁcant
lines of research. Or, given a collection of news articles from a certain time period, where
each article is a node connected to previous, related articles, we might want to display the
most signiﬁcant news stories from that period, and for each story provide a thread that
contains a timeline of its major events. We experiment on data from these two domains in
97

0
50
100
150
0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1
1.2
L1 variational distance
Projection dimension
0
1
2
3
4x 10
8
Memory use (bytes)
Figure 24: The eﬀect of random projections. In black, on the left, we estimate the L1
variational distance between the original and projected models. In blue, on the right, we
plot the memory required for sampling, which is also proportional to running time.
Figure 25: An illustration of graph threading applied to a document collection. We ﬁrst
build a graph from the collection, using measures of importance and relatedness to weight
nodes (documents) and build edges (relationships). Then, from this graph, we extract a
diverse, salient set of threads to represent the collection.
the following sections. Other possibilities might include discovering trends on social media
sites, for example, where users can post image or video responses to each other, or mining
blog entries for important conversations through trackback links. Figure 25 gives an overview
of the graph threading task for document collections.
Generally speaking, graph threading oﬀers a means of gleaning insights from collections
of interrelated objects—for instance, people, documents, images, events, locations, and so
on—that are too large and noisy for manual examination. In contrast to tools like search,
which require the user to specify a query based on prior knowledge, a set of threads provides
an immediate, concise, high-level summary of the collection, not just identifying a set of
important objects but also conveying the relationships between them. As the availability of
such datasets continues to grow, this kind of automated analysis will be key in helping us to
eﬃciently and eﬀectively navigate and understand the information they contain.
6.6.1
Related work
Research from to the Topic Detection and Tracking (TDT) program [Wayne, 2000] has
led to useful methods for tasks like link detection, topic detection, and topic tracking that
98

can be seen as subroutines for graph threading on text collections. Graph threading with
k-SDPPs, however, addresses these tasks jointly, using a global probabilistic model with a
tractable inference algorithm.
Other work in the topic tracking literature has addressed related tasks [Mei and Zhai,
2005, Blei and Laﬀerty, 2006, Leskovec et al., 2009]. In particular, Blei and Laﬀerty [2006]
proposed dynamic topic models (DTMs), which, given a division of text documents into
time slices, attempt to ﬁt a generative model where topics evolve over time, and documents
are drawn from the topics available at the time slice during which they were published. The
evolving topics found by a DTM can be seen as threads of a sort, but in contrast to graph
threading they are not composed of actual items in the dataset (in this case, documents).
In Section 6.6.4 we will return to this distinction when we compare k-SDPP threading to a
DTM baseline.
The information retrieval community has produced other methods for extracting temporal
information from document collections. Swan and Jensen [2000] proposed a system for
ﬁnding temporally clustered named entities in news text and presenting them on a timeline.
Allan et al. [2001] introduced the task of temporal summarization, which takes as input a
stream of news articles related to a particular topic, and then seeks to extract sentences
describing important events as they occur. Yan et al. [2011] evaluated methods for choosing
sentences from temporally clustered documents that are relevant to a query. In contrast,
graph threading seeks not to extract grouped entities or sentences, but instead to organize a
subset of the objects (documents) themselves into threads, with topic identiﬁcation as a side
eﬀect.
Some prior work has also focused more directly on threading. Shahaf and Guestrin
[2010] and Chieu and Lee [2004] proposed methods for selecting individual threads, while
Shahaf et al. [2012] recently proposed metro maps as alternative structured representations
of related news stories. Metro maps are eﬀectively sets of non-chronological threads that
are encouraged to intersect and, in doing so, generate a map of events and topics. However,
these approaches assume some prior knowledge about content. Shahaf and Guestrin [2010],
for example, assume the thread endpoints are speciﬁed, and Chieu and Lee [2004] require
a set of query words. Likewise, because they build metro maps individually, Shahaf et al.
[2012] implicitly assume that the collection is ﬁltered to a single topic, perhaps from a user
query. These inputs make it possible to quickly pare down the document graph. In contrast,
we will apply graph threading to very large graphs, and consider all possible threads.
6.6.2
Setup
In order to be as useful as possible, the threads we extract from a data graph need to be
both high quality, reﬂecting the most important parts of the collection, and diverse, so that
they cover distinct aspects of the data. In addition, we would like to be able to directly
control both the length and the number of threads that we return, since diﬀerent contexts
might necessitate diﬀerent settings. Finally, to be practical our method must be eﬃcient in
both time and memory use. k-SDPPs with random projections allow us to simultaneously
achieve all of these goals.
Given a directed graph on M vertices with edge set E and a real-valued weight function
w(·) on nodes and edges, deﬁne the weight of a thread y = (y1, y2, . . . , yR), (yr, yr+1) ∈E
99

by
w(y) =
R
X
r=1
w(yr) +
R
X
r=2
w(yr−1, yr) .
(284)
We can use w to deﬁne a simple log-linear quality model for our k-SDPP:
q(y) = exp(βw(y))
(285)
=
 R
Y
r=1
exp(w(yr))
R
Y
r=2
exp(w(yr−1, yr))
!β
,
(286)
where β is a hyperparameter controlling the dynamic range of the quality scores. We ﬁx the
value of β on a validation set in our experiments.
Likewise, let φ be a feature function from nodes in the graph to RD; then the diversity
feature function on threads is
φ(y) =
R
X
r=1
φ(yr) .
(287)
In some cases it might also be convenient to have diversity features on edges of the graph
as well as nodes. If so, they can be accommodated without much diﬃculty; however, for
simplicity we proceed with the setup above.
We assume that R, k, and the projection dimension d are provided; the ﬁrst two depend
on application context, and the third, as discussed in Section 6.5, is a tradeoﬀbetween
computational eﬃciency and faithfulness to the original model. To generate diverse thread
samples, we ﬁrst project the diversity features φ by a random d × D matrix G whose entries
are drawn independently and identically from N(0, 1
d). We then apply second-order message
passing to compute the dual representation C, as in Section 6.3.1. After eigendecomposing
C, which is only d × d due to the projection, we can run the ﬁrst phase of the k-DPP
sampling algorithm from Section 5.2.2 to choose a set ˆV of eigenvectors, and ﬁnally complete
the SDPP sampling algorithm in Section 6.3.2 to obtain a set of k threads Y . We now apply
this model to two datasets; one is a citation graph of computer science papers, and the other
is a large corpus of news text.
6.6.3
Academic citation data
The Cora dataset comprises a large collection of approximately 200,000 academic papers
on computer science topics, including citation information [McCallum et al., 2000]. We
construct a directed graph with papers as nodes and citations as edges, and then remove
papers with missing metadata or zero outgoing citations, leaving us with 28,155 papers. The
average out-degree is 3.26 citations per paper, and 0.011% of the total possible edges are
present in the graph.
To obtain useful threads, we set edge weights to reﬂect the degree of textual similarity
between the citing and the cited paper, and node weights to correspond with a measure of
paper “importance”. Speciﬁcally, the weight of edge (a, b) is given by the cosine similarity
metric, which for two documents a and b is the dot product of their normalized tf-idf vectors,
100

as deﬁned in Section 4.2.1:
cos-sim(a, b) =
P
w∈W tfa(w)tfb(w)idf2(w)
qP
w∈W tf2
a(w)idf2(w)
qP
w∈W tf2
b(w)idf2(w)
,
(288)
Here W is a subset of the words found in the documents. We select W by ﬁltering according
to document frequency; that is, we remove words that are too common, appearing in more
than 10% of papers, or too rare, appearing in only one paper. After ﬁltering, there are
50,912 unique words.
The node weights are given by the LexRank score of each paper [Erkan and Radev,
2004]. The LexRank score is the stationary distribution of the thresholded, binarized,
row-normalized matrix of cosine similarities, plus a damping term, which we ﬁx to 0.15.
LexRank is a measure of centrality, so papers that are closely related to many other papers
will receive a higher score.
Finally, we design the diversity feature function φ to encourage topical diversity. Here
we apply cosine similarity again, representing a document by the 1,000 documents to which
it is most similar. This results in binary φ of dimension D = M = 28, 155 with exactly
1,000 non-zeros; φl(yr) = 1 implies that l is one of the 1,000 most similar documents to
yr. Correspondingly, the dot product between the diversity features of two documents is
proportional to the fraction of top-1,000 documents they have in common. In order to make
k-SDPP inference eﬃcient, we project φ down to d = 50 dimensions.
Figure 26 illustrates the behavior of the model when we set k = 4 and R = 5. Samples
from the model, like the one presented in the ﬁgure, not only oﬀer some immediate intuition
about the types of papers contained in the collection, but also, upon examining individual
threads, provide a succinct illustration of the content and development of each area. Fur-
thermore, the sampled threads cover distinct topics, standing apart visually in Figure 26
and exhibiting diverse salient terms.
6.6.4
News articles
Our news dataset comprises over 200,000 articles from the New York Times, collected from
2005-2007 as part of the English Gigaword corpus [Graﬀand Cieri, 2009]. We split the
articles into six groups, with six months’ worth of articles in each group. Because the corpus
contains a signiﬁcant amount of noise in the form of articles that are short snippets, lists
of numbers, and so on, we ﬁlter the results by discarding articles more than two standard
deviations longer than the mean article, articles less than 400 words, and articles whose
fraction of non-alphabetic words is more than two standard deviations above the mean. On
average, for each six-month period we are left with 34,504 articles.
For each time period, we generate a graph with articles as nodes. As for the citations
dataset, we use cosine similarity to deﬁne edge weights. The subset of words W used to
compute cosine similarity contains all words that appear in at least 20 articles and at most
15% of the articles. Across the six time periods, this results in an average of 36,356 unique
words. We include in our graph only those edges with cosine similarity of at least 0.1;
furthermore, we require that edges go forward in time to enforce the chronological ordering
of threads. The resulting graphs have an average of 0.32% of the total possible edges, and an
average degree of 107. As before, we use LexRank for node weights, and the top-1000 similar
101

delay interconnect
wiresizing elmore-based
routing tree
mobile clients hoard server 
client database
policy decision
markov pomdps
partially uncertainty
learning lifelong
 training tasks
 invariances control
Thread: learning lifelong training tasks invariances control
1. Locally Weighted Learning for Control
2. Discovering Structure in Multiple Learning Tasks: The TC Algorithm
3. Learning One More Thing
4. Explanation Based Learning for Mobile Robot Perception
5. Learning Analytically and Inductively
Thread: mobile clients hoard server client database
1. A Database Architecture for Handling Mobile Clients
2. An Architecture for Mobile Databases
3. Database Server Organization for Handling Mobile Clients
4. Mobile Wireless Computing: Solutions and Challenges in Data Management
5. Energy Eﬃcient Query Optimization
Figure 26: Sampled threads from a 4-SDPP with thread length R = 5 on the Cora dataset.
Above, we plot a subset of the Cora papers, projecting their tf-idf vectors to two dimensions
by running PCA on the centroids of the threads, and then highlight the thread selections in
color. Displayed beside each thread are the words in the thread with highest tf-idf score.
Below, we show the titles of the papers in two of the threads.
102

STUDY ANALYZES DATA ON ILLEGAL IMMIGRANTS
STUDY ANALYZES DATA ON ILLEGAL IMMIGRANTS
WELCOME TO 'TEH-JAS,' LAND OF THE ALAMO AND COWBOY
WELCOME TO 'TEH-JAS,' LAND OF THE ALAMO AND COWBOY
FOR IMMIGRANTS, SUCCESS OFTEN STARTS WITH BIZARRE STREET SIGNS
FOR IMMIGRANTS, SUCCESS OFTEN STARTS WITH BIZARRE STREET SIGNS
DOMINICANS TAKE THEIR PLACE AS AN AMERICAN SUCCESS STORY
DOMINICANS TAKE THEIR PLACE AS AN AMERICAN SUCCESS STORY
MEXICAN MANUAL ON ILLEGAL IMMIGRATION DRAWS FIRE
MEXICAN MANUAL ON ILLEGAL IMMIGRATION DRAWS FIRE
CALIFORNIA REPUBLICAN COUNTERS BUSH IMMIGRATION PLAN
CALIFORNIA REPUBLICAN COUNTERS BUSH IMMIGRATION PLAN
L TARGETS FAKE SOCIAL SECURITY CARDS; PROPOSAL CALLS FOR DIGITAL PHOTO, ELECTRONIC STRIP
L TARGETS FAKE SOCIAL SECURITY CARDS; PROPOSAL CALLS FOR DIGITAL PHOTO, ELECTRONIC STRIP
GARCIA SEEKS MAJOR FOR HIS RESUME
GARCIA SEEKS MAJOR FOR HIS RESUME
VIDEOCONFERENCES LINK IMMIGRANTS AND LOVED ONES
VIDEOCONFERENCES LINK IMMIGRANTS AND LOVED ONES
BORDER CROSSING: A GUIDE FOR THE ILLEGAL MIGRANT
BORDER CROSSING: A GUIDE FOR THE ILLEGAL MIGRANT
POLITICIANS' DREAM WOULD BECOME A NIGHTMARE FOR COPS
POLITICIANS' DREAM WOULD BECOME A NIGHTMARE FOR COPS
NEW SOCIAL SECURITY CARD COULD THWART ILLEGAL IMMIGRANTS
NEW SOCIAL SECURITY CARD COULD THWART ILLEGAL IMMIGRANTS
AS HISPANICS EMBRACE LIFE IN U.S., SOME PREFER TO LIMIT FAMILY SIZE
AS HISPANICS EMBRACE LIFE IN U.S., SOME PREFER TO LIMIT FAMILY SIZE
TEXAS CONGRESSMAN CORNYN TO LEAD IMMIGRATION PANEL; SENATOR'S BILL, REFLECTIVE OF WHITE HOUSE REFORM GOALS, MEETS OPPOSITION
TEXAS CONGRESSMAN CORNYN TO LEAD IMMIGRATION PANEL; SENATOR'S BILL, REFLECTIVE OF WHITE HOUSE REFORM GOALS, MEETS OPPOSITION
FIGHTING FOR U.S., AND FOR GREEN CARDS
FIGHTING FOR U.S., AND FOR GREEN CARDS
BUSH VOWS TO PUSH IMMIGRATION PLAN THROUGH THIS TIME
BUSH VOWS TO PUSH IMMIGRATION PLAN THROUGH THIS TIME
ON SCREEN, TACKLING EUROPE'S NEW REALITY
ON SCREEN, TACKLING EUROPE'S NEW REALITY
BUSH AGENDA FACES SOME GOP RESISTANCE
BUSH AGENDA FACES SOME GOP RESISTANCE
EDITORIAL: THE PRESIDENT'S SHOELACES
EDITORIAL: THE PRESIDENT'S SHOELACES
PROBLEMS WITH SPEAKING ENGLISH MULTIPLY IN A DECADE
PROBLEMS WITH SPEAKING ENGLISH MULTIPLY IN A DECADE
GUEST WORKER PLAN DIVIDES LAWMAKERS PRESIDENT SUPPORTS IDEA TO HELP ILLEGAL ALIENS TOILING IN U.S.
GUEST WORKER PLAN DIVIDES LAWMAKERS PRESIDENT SUPPORTS IDEA TO HELP ILLEGAL ALIENS TOILING IN U.S.
ALLEGED LEADER IN HUMAN-SMUGGLING DEATHS WANTS TO WITHDRAW GUILTY PLEA
ALLEGED LEADER IN HUMAN-SMUGGLING DEATHS WANTS TO WITHDRAW GUILTY PLEA
JURY SELECTION TO BEGIN TUESDAY IN HUMAN-SMUGGLING TRIAL OF ACCUSED TRUCKER IN DEATHS OF 19 ILLEGAL IMMIGRANTS
JURY SELECTION TO BEGIN TUESDAY IN HUMAN-SMUGGLING TRIAL OF ACCUSED TRUCKER IN DEATHS OF 19 ILLEGAL IMMIGRANTS
NEW MIGRANT LAW IRKS MEXICO
NEW MIGRANT LAW IRKS MEXICO
HELPING EDUCATORS THROW OUT OLD RULES AND TAKE A FEW RISKS
HELPING EDUCATORS THROW OUT OLD RULES AND TAKE A FEW RISKS
RECORD IMMIGRATION CHANGING NEW YORK'S NEIGHBORHOODS
RECORD IMMIGRATION CHANGING NEW YORK'S NEIGHBORHOODS
ATTORNEYS SAY TESTIMONY WILL SHOW OFFICIALS LET TRUCK PASS WITH ILLEGAL IMMIGRANTS
ATTORNEYS SAY TESTIMONY WILL SHOW OFFICIALS LET TRUCK PASS WITH ILLEGAL IMMIGRANTS
FEINSTEIN BILL WOULD PROTECT FOREIGN KIDS IN U.S. CUSTODY SENATE BILL WOULD PROTECT FOREIGN CHILDREN IN U.S. CUSTODY
FEINSTEIN BILL WOULD PROTECT FOREIGN KIDS IN U.S. CUSTODY SENATE BILL WOULD PROTECT FOREIGN CHILDREN IN U.S. CUSTODY
IMMIGRATION BOOM COOLING
IMMIGRATION BOOM COOLING
REPUBLICANS SQUARING OFF OVER BUSH PLAN ON IMMIGRATION
REPUBLICANS SQUARING OFF OVER BUSH PLAN ON IMMIGRATION
SMUGGLING-DEFENDANT-HNS
SMUGGLING-DEFENDANT-HNS
BUSH VOWS COOPERATION ON IMMIGRATION REFORM; DIFFERENCES OVER SCOPE, AGENDA MAY STALL PLAN
BUSH VOWS COOPERATION ON IMMIGRATION REFORM; DIFFERENCES OVER SCOPE, AGENDA MAY STALL PLAN
JUDGE SAYS GUILTY PLEA IN DEADLY TEXAS SMUGGLING MUST STAND
JUDGE SAYS GUILTY PLEA IN DEADLY TEXAS SMUGGLING MUST STAND
HOUSING, IMMIGRATION CALLED KEYS TO THE FUTURE
HOUSING, IMMIGRATION CALLED KEYS TO THE FUTURE
PRESIDENT REIGNITES EMOTIONAL DEBATE OVER IMMIGRATION POLICY
PRESIDENT REIGNITES EMOTIONAL DEBATE OVER IMMIGRATION POLICY
GUEST WORKER PLAN WILL BE TOUGH SELL FOR BUSH
GUEST WORKER PLAN WILL BE TOUGH SELL FOR BUSH
MEXICAN POLITICIANS FIND BENEFITS IN U.S. CAMPAIGNS
MEXICAN POLITICIANS FIND BENEFITS IN U.S. CAMPAIGNS
SEN. CORNYN FOCUESES IN IMMIGRATION
SEN. CORNYN FOCUESES IN IMMIGRATION
TANCREDO WEIGHS PRESIDENTIAL RUN WITH PILGRIMAGE TO N.H.
TANCREDO WEIGHS PRESIDENTIAL RUN WITH PILGRIMAGE TO N.H.
BRITAIN, SPAIN, BOTH IN EU, ANNOUNCE DIVERGENT IMMIGRATION POLICIES
BRITAIN, SPAIN, BOTH IN EU, ANNOUNCE DIVERGENT IMMIGRATION POLICIES
SPAIN LETS ILLEGAL IMMIGRANTS SEEK RESIDENCY
SPAIN LETS ILLEGAL IMMIGRANTS SEEK RESIDENCY
IMMIGRANT-LICENSES-HNS
IMMIGRANT-LICENSES-HNS
BUSH BACKS DRIVER'S LICENSE BAN
BUSH BACKS DRIVER'S LICENSE BAN
DEPORTED FROM MEXICO, 3 MORE IN ALLEGED SMUGGLING RING MAY FACE CAPITAL PUNISHMENT IN DEATHS OF 19 IMMIGRANTS
DEPORTED FROM MEXICO, 3 MORE IN ALLEGED SMUGGLING RING MAY FACE CAPITAL PUNISHMENT IN DEATHS OF 19 IMMIGRANTS
HOUSE APPROVES TOUGHER IMMIGRATION BILL
HOUSE APPROVES TOUGHER IMMIGRATION BILL
TAKING HARD LINE ON ILLEGAL IMMIGRANTS: HOUSE PASSES BILL TO MAKE IT TOUGHER TO GET ASYLUM OR DRIVER'S LICENSES
TAKING HARD LINE ON ILLEGAL IMMIGRANTS: HOUSE PASSES BILL TO MAKE IT TOUGHER TO GET ASYLUM OR DRIVER'S LICENSES
HOUSE PASSES TIGHTENING OF LAWS ON IMMIGRATION
HOUSE PASSES TIGHTENING OF LAWS ON IMMIGRATION
HOUSE OKS BAN ON LICENSES FOR ILLEGAL IMMIGRANTS
HOUSE OKS BAN ON LICENSES FOR ILLEGAL IMMIGRANTS
MEXICANS HELP TRANSFORM HOMES THEY LEFT
MEXICANS HELP TRANSFORM HOMES THEY LEFT
ANDY GARCIA NEARS END OF HIS QUEST: A FILM ON CUBA
ANDY GARCIA NEARS END OF HIS QUEST: A FILM ON CUBA
MEXICO HAS JOBS PLAN FOR CITIZENS DEPORTED FROM U.S.
MEXICO HAS JOBS PLAN FOR CITIZENS DEPORTED FROM U.S.
REPORT LINKS SOCIAL SECURITY FINANCES IN PART TO LEVELS OF IMMIGRATION
REPORT LINKS SOCIAL SECURITY FINANCES IN PART TO LEVELS OF IMMIGRATION
IN DEPORTATIONS OF PARENTS, FATE OF CHILDREN IS OFTEN AN AFTERTHOUGHT
IN DEPORTATIONS OF PARENTS, FATE OF CHILDREN IS OFTEN AN AFTERTHOUGHT
JUDGE BLOCKS NEW YORK DENIAL OF IMMIGRANT DRIVER LICENSES
JUDGE BLOCKS NEW YORK DENIAL OF IMMIGRANT DRIVER LICENSES
IMMIGRANT VOTERS DEFY POLITICAL PATTERNS
IMMIGRANT VOTERS DEFY POLITICAL PATTERNS
KC-AFGHAN-NEWS
KC-AFGHAN-NEWS
POLICY SHIFT IN GERMANY TRIMS JEWISH MIGRATION
POLICY SHIFT IN GERMANY TRIMS JEWISH MIGRATION
IN JOB MARKET, SOME WIN, SOME LOSE
IN JOB MARKET, SOME WIN, SOME LOSE
HUNDREDS GET AID AT VALLEY SHELTERS
HUNDREDS GET AID AT VALLEY SHELTERS
POLITICAL PRESSURE MOUNTING TO BOOST BORDER PATROL AGENTS ALONG BORDER
POLITICAL PRESSURE MOUNTING TO BOOST BORDER PATROL AGENTS ALONG BORDER
P1 A23 MEXICO-HNS
P1 A23 MEXICO-HNS
MEXICO-VOTE-HNS
MEXICO-VOTE-HNS
BILL TO LET MEXICAN MIGRANTS VOTE HITS ROADBLOCKS
BILL TO LET MEXICAN MIGRANTS VOTE HITS ROADBLOCKS
MORE DUTCH PLAN TO EMIGRATE AS MUSLIM INFLUX TIPS SCALES
MORE DUTCH PLAN TO EMIGRATE AS MUSLIM INFLUX TIPS SCALES
GONZALES LAYS OUT HIS PRIORITIES AT JUSTICE DEPT.
GONZALES LAYS OUT HIS PRIORITIES AT JUSTICE DEPT.
MOST UNDOCUMENTED IMMIGRANTS RECEPTIVE TO GUEST WORKER PROGRAM
MOST UNDOCUMENTED IMMIGRANTS RECEPTIVE TO GUEST WORKER PROGRAM
SURVEY: MOST MEXICAN IMMIGRANTS WOULD USE GUEST WORKER PROGRAM
SURVEY: MOST MEXICAN IMMIGRANTS WOULD USE GUEST WORKER PROGRAM
SURVEY: MOST UNDOCUMENTED ALIENS SUPPORT GUEST WORKER PLAN
SURVEY: MOST UNDOCUMENTED ALIENS SUPPORT GUEST WORKER PLAN
NEW STUDY PAINTS CLEARER PICTURE OF MEXICANS IN NEW YORK CITY
NEW STUDY PAINTS CLEARER PICTURE OF MEXICANS IN NEW YORK CITY
IMMIGRATION CHANGES COULD CUT BACK ASYLUM SEEKERS
IMMIGRATION CHANGES COULD CUT BACK ASYLUM SEEKERS
TEXAS TO HOST U.S.-MEXICO-CANDADA SUMMIT
TEXAS TO HOST U.S.-MEXICO-CANDADA SUMMIT
YOUNG BULLDOGS LEARN HARD WAY
YOUNG BULLDOGS LEARN HARD WAY
TRIAL STARTS IN NATION'S DEADLIEST HUMAN SMUGGLING CASE
TRIAL STARTS IN NATION'S DEADLIEST HUMAN SMUGGLING CASE
RICE SAYS AL-QAIDA FOCUSED ON BREACHING U.S. BORDERS, ANNOUNCES WATER AGREEMENT WITH MEXICO
RICE SAYS AL-QAIDA FOCUSED ON BREACHING U.S. BORDERS, ANNOUNCES WATER AGREEMENT WITH MEXICO
BORDER-PATROL-HNS
BORDER-PATROL-HNS
RICE SEEKS THAW IN MEXICO-U.S. RELATIONS
RICE SEEKS THAW IN MEXICO-U.S. RELATIONS
CASE FOCUSES ON DEFINITION OF TORTURE FOR DEPORTEES
CASE FOCUSES ON DEFINITION OF TORTURE FOR DEPORTEES
FIRST THEY WERE SOLDIERS -- NOW THEY'RE CITIZENS; IMMIGRANTS WHO FOUGHT FOR U.S. ARE NATURALIZED, GREETED BY BUSH SR.
FIRST THEY WERE SOLDIERS -- NOW THEY'RE CITIZENS; IMMIGRANTS WHO FOUGHT FOR U.S. ARE NATURALIZED, GREETED BY BUSH SR.
ADVANCE FOR SUNDAY, MARCH 13 IMMIGRANTS MAY GET TO VOTE HERE IN MEXICO'S 2006 ELECTION
ADVANCE FOR SUNDAY, MARCH 13 IMMIGRANTS MAY GET TO VOTE HERE IN MEXICO'S 2006 ELECTION
DESPITE NEW EFFORTS ALONG ARIZONA BORDER, 'SERIOUS PROBLEMS' REMAIN
DESPITE NEW EFFORTS ALONG ARIZONA BORDER, 'SERIOUS PROBLEMS' REMAIN
MYTH CITED REPEATEDLY IN IMMIGRATION DEBATE
MYTH CITED REPEATEDLY IN IMMIGRATION DEBATE
SWEEP NETS 103 SUSPECTS OF MS-13 GANG IN SEVEN CITIES
SWEEP NETS 103 SUSPECTS OF MS-13 GANG IN SEVEN CITIES
FEDS SAY SWEEP NETS 100 MEMBERS OF IMMIGRANT GANG
FEDS SAY SWEEP NETS 100 MEMBERS OF IMMIGRANT GANG
U.S.-MEXICO BORDER STILL TOO POROUS, OFFICIALS SAY
U.S.-MEXICO BORDER STILL TOO POROUS, OFFICIALS SAY
ALLEGED OBSCENE GESTURE DELAYS IMMIGRANT SMUGGLING TRIAL; DEATH PENALTY PROTESTERS CLAIM JUROR HAS ALREADY MADE UP HIS MIND
ALLEGED OBSCENE GESTURE DELAYS IMMIGRANT SMUGGLING TRIAL; DEATH PENALTY PROTESTERS CLAIM JUROR HAS ALREADY MADE UP HIS MIND
FOX REFUTES U.S. CLAIMS ON AL-QAIDA, VOWS LEGAL ACTION TO HALT VIGILANTES
FOX REFUTES U.S. CLAIMS ON AL-QAIDA, VOWS LEGAL ACTION TO HALT VIGILANTES
FOX TO PUSH IMMIGRATION, SECURITY, TRADE ISSUES DURING MEETING WITH BUSH, CANADA'S PRIME MINISTER
FOX TO PUSH IMMIGRATION, SECURITY, TRADE ISSUES DURING MEETING WITH BUSH, CANADA'S PRIME MINISTER
TESTIMONY IN TRUCK DRIVER'S IMMIGRANT SMUGGLING CASE HALTED AFTER PROSECUTION RESTS; JUDGE QUESTIONS HARBORING CHARGES
TESTIMONY IN TRUCK DRIVER'S IMMIGRANT SMUGGLING CASE HALTED AFTER PROSECUTION RESTS; JUDGE QUESTIONS HARBORING CHARGES
57 BRAZILIANS HELD AFTER BRIBE IS ALLEGED
57 BRAZILIANS HELD AFTER BRIBE IS ALLEGED
WAL-MART TO PAY $11 MILLION IN ILLEGAL IMMIGRANT CASE
WAL-MART TO PAY $11 MILLION IN ILLEGAL IMMIGRANT CASE
WAL-MART SETTLES ILLEGAL IMMIGRANT CASE FOR $11 MILLION
WAL-MART SETTLES ILLEGAL IMMIGRANT CASE FOR $11 MILLION
GARCIA WANTS TO BE PART OF THE CONVERSATION
GARCIA WANTS TO BE PART OF THE CONVERSATION
EDITORIAL OBSERVER: ENLIGHTENED IMMIGRATION
EDITORIAL OBSERVER: ENLIGHTENED IMMIGRATION
EDITORIAL: OUR TERRORIST-FRIENDLY BORDERS
EDITORIAL: OUR TERRORIST-FRIENDLY BORDERS
10.3 MILLION FROM MEXICO IN U.S. ILLEGALLY, RESEARCHER ON LATINOS SAYS
10.3 MILLION FROM MEXICO IN U.S. ILLEGALLY, RESEARCHER ON LATINOS SAYS
BUSH FOCUSES ON BORDER ISSUES WITH MEXICO, CANADA
BUSH FOCUSES ON BORDER ISSUES WITH MEXICO, CANADA
LANGUAGE PLAYS A LOUD VOICE IN DEBATE ABOUT IMMIGRATION REFORM
LANGUAGE PLAYS A LOUD VOICE IN DEBATE ABOUT IMMIGRATION REFORM
U.S. BEGINS TO SEE NATIONAL SECURITY GAP IN MEXICAN SMUGGLING
U.S. BEGINS TO SEE NATIONAL SECURITY GAP IN MEXICAN SMUGGLING
MEXICANS VOTING IN U.S. COULD ALTER POLITICS
MEXICANS VOTING IN U.S. COULD ALTER POLITICS
TEXAS ADVOCATES FOR IMMIGRATION REFORMS JOIN OTHERS AROUND NATION IN RALLIES URGING BUSH, FOX TO ACT QUICKLY
TEXAS ADVOCATES FOR IMMIGRATION REFORMS JOIN OTHERS AROUND NATION IN RALLIES URGING BUSH, FOX TO ACT QUICKLY
SECURITY, TRADE TO BE PRIMARY FOCUS OF BUSH-FOX-MARTIN SUMMIT
SECURITY, TRADE TO BE PRIMARY FOCUS OF BUSH-FOX-MARTIN SUMMIT
NORTH AMERICAN LEADERS MAKE BORDERS AND TRADE A PRIORITY
NORTH AMERICAN LEADERS MAKE BORDERS AND TRADE A PRIORITY
BUSH TELLS MEXICAN LEADER HE'LL CONTINUE TO SEEK IMMIGRATION LAW CHANGES
BUSH TELLS MEXICAN LEADER HE'LL CONTINUE TO SEEK IMMIGRATION LAW CHANGES
BUSH TELLS MEXICAN LEADER HE'LL SEEK IMMIGRATION LAW CHANGES
BUSH TELLS MEXICAN LEADER HE'LL SEEK IMMIGRATION LAW CHANGES
LEAVING A YEAR EARLY, BUT A YEAR TOO LATE
LEAVING A YEAR EARLY, BUT A YEAR TOO LATE
BUSH SUMMIT VOWS CLOSER TIES, BETTER TIMES AHEAD
BUSH SUMMIT VOWS CLOSER TIES, BETTER TIMES AHEAD
U.S. SIGNS TRADE, SECURITY DEAL WITH MEXICO, CANADA; BUSH PUSHES FOR IMPROVED TIES WITH SOUTH AMERICA
U.S. SIGNS TRADE, SECURITY DEAL WITH MEXICO, CANADA; BUSH PUSHES FOR IMPROVED TIES WITH SOUTH AMERICA
KEEPING IMMIGRATION LEGAL
KEEPING IMMIGRATION LEGAL
DUKE BLOCKS GEORGIA'S ROAD TO INDY
DUKE BLOCKS GEORGIA'S ROAD TO INDY
THAT BURGER-FLIPPER IS NO KID ANYMORE
THAT BURGER-FLIPPER IS NO KID ANYMORE
MOTHERS IMMIGRATING TO BECOME BREADWINNERS
MOTHERS IMMIGRATING TO BECOME BREADWINNERS
LAST OF THREE PARTS; WITH PHOTOS, GRAPHIC CANADA'S OPEN BORDER BOON TO HUMAN TRAFFICKERS
LAST OF THREE PARTS; WITH PHOTOS, GRAPHIC CANADA'S OPEN BORDER BOON TO HUMAN TRAFFICKERS
BEST, BRIGHTEST MUST CHOOSE BETWEEN MENIAL JOBS IN U.S., ROCKY FUTURE AT HOME
BEST, BRIGHTEST MUST CHOOSE BETWEEN MENIAL JOBS IN U.S., ROCKY FUTURE AT HOME
U.S. TO REINFORCE POROUS ARIZONA BORDER
U.S. TO REINFORCE POROUS ARIZONA BORDER
REPORT URGES CUTS IN CARE FOR ILLEGAL IMMIGRANTS
REPORT URGES CUTS IN CARE FOR ILLEGAL IMMIGRANTS
DNA HELPS IDENTIFIES MEXICAN MIGRANTS IN PAUPERS' GRAVES
DNA HELPS IDENTIFIES MEXICAN MIGRANTS IN PAUPERS' GRAVES
CIVILIAN PATROL TO RAISE BORDER CONCERNS
CIVILIAN PATROL TO RAISE BORDER CONCERNS
FALLEN BROTHER INSPIRATION FOR GARCIA
FALLEN BROTHER INSPIRATION FOR GARCIA
ARMED VOLUNTEERS WAIT ALONG ARIZONA BORDER TO STOP ILLEGAL IMMIGRANTS
ARMED VOLUNTEERS WAIT ALONG ARIZONA BORDER TO STOP ILLEGAL IMMIGRANTS
KC-5LOUVILLE1,
KC-5LOUVILLE1,
WANTED: BORDER HOPPERS. AND SOME EXCITEMENT, TOO.
WANTED: BORDER HOPPERS. AND SOME EXCITEMENT, TOO.
VOLUNTEERS SET TO PATROL ARIZ. BORDER
VOLUNTEERS SET TO PATROL ARIZ. BORDER
IMMIGRATION FOES BEGIN ARIZONA BORDER WATCH
IMMIGRATION FOES BEGIN ARIZONA BORDER WATCH
HOW SOCIAL SECURITY BALANCES BOOKS ON BACKS OF IMMIGRANTS
HOW SOCIAL SECURITY BALANCES BOOKS ON BACKS OF IMMIGRANTS
CITIZEN PATROL SPREADS FEAR, RESOLVE AT US-MEXICO BORDER
CITIZEN PATROL SPREADS FEAR, RESOLVE AT US-MEXICO BORDER
CITIZEN PATROL SPREADS FEAR, RESOLVE AT BORDER
CITIZEN PATROL SPREADS FEAR, RESOLVE AT BORDER
FEW VOLUNTEERS FOR BORDER PROJECT
FEW VOLUNTEERS FOR BORDER PROJECT
WHITE POWER GROUPS TRY NEW TACTICS AND TOOLS
WHITE POWER GROUPS TRY NEW TACTICS AND TOOLS
POLICE SAY IMMIGRANT POLICY IS A HINDRANCE
POLICE SAY IMMIGRANT POLICY IS A HINDRANCE
BATTLE OVER LICENSES FOR IMMIGRANTS BACK IN COURT
BATTLE OVER LICENSES FOR IMMIGRANTS BACK IN COURT
THE INVISIBLE DELIVERYMAN
THE INVISIBLE DELIVERYMAN
GIRL CALLED WOULD-BE BOMBER WAS DRAWN TO ISLAM
GIRL CALLED WOULD-BE BOMBER WAS DRAWN TO ISLAM
RAID NETS 53 ILLEGAL IMMIGRANTS IN SOUTHWEST HOUSTON HOME
RAID NETS 53 ILLEGAL IMMIGRANTS IN SOUTHWEST HOUSTON HOME
BUSINESSES MAKING A PUSH FOR GUEST WORKER PLAN MOVING IN WASHINGTON AND FINANCIAL CATEGORIES FOR RELEASE SUNDAY, APRIL 10.
BUSINESSES MAKING A PUSH FOR GUEST WORKER PLAN MOVING IN WASHINGTON AND FINANCIAL CATEGORIES FOR RELEASE SUNDAY, APRIL 10.
OUTRAGE AT ARREST OF GIRL, 16, AS TERRORIST THREAT
OUTRAGE AT ARREST OF GIRL, 16, AS TERRORIST THREAT
ADVANCE FOR USE SUNDAY, APRIL 10, AND THEREAFTER. "MINUTEMEN" SEE LITTLE ACTION ALONG BORDER
ADVANCE FOR USE SUNDAY, APRIL 10, AND THEREAFTER. "MINUTEMEN" SEE LITTLE ACTION ALONG BORDER
COMMENTARY: AILING HEALTH CARE
COMMENTARY: AILING HEALTH CARE
LOCAL BRAZILIANS SAY THEY'RE TARGETED UNFAIRLY
LOCAL BRAZILIANS SAY THEY'RE TARGETED UNFAIRLY
EDITORIAL: A WEST TOO WILD
EDITORIAL: A WEST TOO WILD
SIERRA CLUB ASKS MEMBER VOTE ON IMMIGRATION LIMITS
SIERRA CLUB ASKS MEMBER VOTE ON IMMIGRATION LIMITS
SIERRA CLUB SPLIT AGAIN ON IMMIGRATION STANCE
SIERRA CLUB SPLIT AGAIN ON IMMIGRATION STANCE
FRIST OPPOSES AMENDMENTS ON IMMIGRANTS
FRIST OPPOSES AMENDMENTS ON IMMIGRANTS
BORDER RESIDENTS SAY 'MINUTEMAN' PATROLS HIGHLIGHT A CRISIS
BORDER RESIDENTS SAY 'MINUTEMAN' PATROLS HIGHLIGHT A CRISIS
IMMIGRATION MEASURE HITS SENATE ROADBLOCK
IMMIGRATION MEASURE HITS SENATE ROADBLOCK
HOTEL FIRE SHEDS LIGHT ON FRANCE'S ILLEGAL IMMIGRANTS
HOTEL FIRE SHEDS LIGHT ON FRANCE'S ILLEGAL IMMIGRANTS
DEEPLY SPLIT SENATE REJECTS GUEST FARMWORKER BILL
DEEPLY SPLIT SENATE REJECTS GUEST FARMWORKER BILL
SENATE CLEARS WAY FOR VOTE ON SPENDING FOR MILITARY
SENATE CLEARS WAY FOR VOTE ON SPENDING FOR MILITARY
SENATE APPROVES $81.26 BILLION IN A MILITARY EMERGENCY BILL
SENATE APPROVES $81.26 BILLION IN A MILITARY EMERGENCY BILL
IMMIGRATION CONTROL ADVOCATES DESCEND ON CAPITOL HILL
IMMIGRATION CONTROL ADVOCATES DESCEND ON CAPITOL HILL
POLICE REPORT NONCITIZENS TO U.S., OFFICIAL SAYS
POLICE REPORT NONCITIZENS TO U.S., OFFICIAL SAYS
BRITISH ELECTION DEBATE SPOTLIGHTS CONCERN ABOUT IMMIGRATION
BRITISH ELECTION DEBATE SPOTLIGHTS CONCERN ABOUT IMMIGRATION
TOP DOGS! GYM DOGS TAKE TITLE
TOP DOGS! GYM DOGS TAKE TITLE
ILLEGAL IMMIGRATION FOES DEMANDING ACTION
ILLEGAL IMMIGRATION FOES DEMANDING ACTION
SIERRA CLUB STANDS PAT ON IMMIGRATION POLICY
SIERRA CLUB STANDS PAT ON IMMIGRATION POLICY
KOSOVAR FEARS ID PROPOSAL WILL JEOPARDIZE SAFE LIFE IN U.S.
KOSOVAR FEARS ID PROPOSAL WILL JEOPARDIZE SAFE LIFE IN U.S.
A MISTAKEN ID LAW (FOR USE
A MISTAKEN ID LAW (FOR USE
TRAFFICKING LEADS LATINO SUMMIT AGENDA
TRAFFICKING LEADS LATINO SUMMIT AGENDA
IMMIGRATION-SCAM-HNS
IMMIGRATION-SCAM-HNS
LATINO KIDS LAG IN HEALTH COVERAGE
LATINO KIDS LAG IN HEALTH COVERAGE
LAWMAKERS TO DECIDE FATE OF DRIVER'S LICENSE IMMIGRATION BILL
LAWMAKERS TO DECIDE FATE OF DRIVER'S LICENSE IMMIGRATION BILL
WHITE HOUSE BACKS LEGISLATION THAT WOULD TOUGHEN IMMIGRATION RULES
WHITE HOUSE BACKS LEGISLATION THAT WOULD TOUGHEN IMMIGRATION RULES
IN RARE ACCORD, SPURNED ASYLUM SEEKER TO GET $87,500
IN RARE ACCORD, SPURNED ASYLUM SEEKER TO GET $87,500
COMMENTARY: A PRIVATE OBSESSION
COMMENTARY: A PRIVATE OBSESSION
EX-VALLEY MAN IN VANGUARD OF MINUTEMAN PROJECT
EX-VALLEY MAN IN VANGUARD OF MINUTEMAN PROJECT
SCHWARZENEGGER ENDORSES ARMED VOLUNTEERS ON BORDER
SCHWARZENEGGER ENDORSES ARMED VOLUNTEERS ON BORDER
GOVERNOR SIGNALS HE'D WELCOME MINUTEMEN ON CALIFORNIA BORDER
GOVERNOR SIGNALS HE'D WELCOME MINUTEMEN ON CALIFORNIA BORDER
VALLEY HOSPITAL BOOM UNDER WAY
VALLEY HOSPITAL BOOM UNDER WAY
ACTIVISTS, OPPONENTS CLASH AT IMMIGRATION RALLY
ACTIVISTS, OPPONENTS CLASH AT IMMIGRATION RALLY
MEXICAN SENATOR WANTS TO BLOCK WOULD-BE ILLEGAL IMMIGRANTS FROM ENTERING U.S.
MEXICAN SENATOR WANTS TO BLOCK WOULD-BE ILLEGAL IMMIGRANTS FROM ENTERING U.S.
MAYANS HERE TRY TO SAVE OLD WAYS
MAYANS HERE TRY TO SAVE OLD WAYS
STATE OFFICIALS WARY OF NEW DRIVER'S LICENSE REQUIREMENTS
STATE OFFICIALS WARY OF NEW DRIVER'S LICENSE REQUIREMENTS
EDITORIAL: AN UNREALISTIC 'REAL ID'
EDITORIAL: AN UNREALISTIC 'REAL ID'
ROUTINE LICENSE CHECK CAN MEAN JAIL AND DEPORTATION
ROUTINE LICENSE CHECK CAN MEAN JAIL AND DEPORTATION
HOUSE PASSES EMERGENCY SPENDING BILL
HOUSE PASSES EMERGENCY SPENDING BILL
BILL WOULD PROTECT ILLEGAL IMMIGRANT DRIVERS' CARS FROM IMPOUND
BILL WOULD PROTECT ILLEGAL IMMIGRANT DRIVERS' CARS FROM IMPOUND
HOUSE OKS $82 BILLION MORE FOR WARS
HOUSE OKS $82 BILLION MORE FOR WARS
IMMIGRANTS IN TENNESSEE ISSUED CERTIFICATES TO DRIVE ARIEL HART CONTRIBUTED REPORTING FOR THIS ARTICLE FROM ATLANTA.
IMMIGRANTS IN TENNESSEE ISSUED CERTIFICATES TO DRIVE ARIEL HART CONTRIBUTED REPORTING FOR THIS ARTICLE FROM ATLANTA.
PAYMENTS TO HELP HOSPITALS CARE FOR ILLEGAL IMMIGRANTS
PAYMENTS TO HELP HOSPITALS CARE FOR ILLEGAL IMMIGRANTS
IMMIGRANTS' PLIGHT BECOMES A RALLYING CRY AMONG LATINO, U.S. MUSICIANS
IMMIGRANTS' PLIGHT BECOMES A RALLYING CRY AMONG LATINO, U.S. MUSICIANS
CATHOLIC GROUPS LAUNCH IMMIGRATION REFORM CAMPAIGN
CATHOLIC GROUPS LAUNCH IMMIGRATION REFORM CAMPAIGN
BORDER STATES COMPLAIN THAT U.S. ISN'T FOOTING THE BILL FOR JAILING ILLEGAL IMMIGRANTS
BORDER STATES COMPLAIN THAT U.S. ISN'T FOOTING THE BILL FOR JAILING ILLEGAL IMMIGRANTS
NATIONAL CHILDREN'S STUDY STARVING FOR FUNDS, BACKERS SAY
NATIONAL CHILDREN'S STUDY STARVING FOR FUNDS, BACKERS SAY
SENATE APPROVES MONEY FOR IRAQ WAR; RESTRICTS DRIVER'S LICENSES FOR ILLEGAL IMMIGRANTS
SENATE APPROVES MONEY FOR IRAQ WAR; RESTRICTS DRIVER'S LICENSES FOR ILLEGAL IMMIGRANTS
IMMIGRANTS ENCOURAGED TO RIDE BUS
IMMIGRANTS ENCOURAGED TO RIDE BUS
IMMIGRATION-CRACKDOWN-HNS
IMMIGRATION-CRACKDOWN-HNS
SENATE UNANIMOUSLY OKS WAR FUNDING AND DRIVERS LICENSE RESTRICTIONS FOR IMMIGRANTS
SENATE UNANIMOUSLY OKS WAR FUNDING AND DRIVERS LICENSE RESTRICTIONS FOR IMMIGRANTS
DENIAL OF DRIVER'S LICENSES TO MANY IMMIGRANTS VOIDED IN NEW YORK
DENIAL OF DRIVER'S LICENSES TO MANY IMMIGRANTS VOIDED IN NEW YORK
MINUTEMEN-IMMIGRANTS-HNS
MINUTEMEN-IMMIGRANTS-HNS
MAJOR IMMIGRATION REFORM MEASURE TO BE INTRODUCED
MAJOR IMMIGRATION REFORM MEASURE TO BE INTRODUCED
GARCIA MAY HAVE CRASHED, BUT HE'S NOT BURNED UP
GARCIA MAY HAVE CRASHED, BUT HE'S NOT BURNED UP
BILL WOULD ALLOW ILLEGAL IMMIGRANTS TO BECOME LEGAL TEMPORARY WORKERS
BILL WOULD ALLOW ILLEGAL IMMIGRANTS TO BECOME LEGAL TEMPORARY WORKERS
MCCAIN, KENNEDY BILL WOULD PUT MILLIONS OF ILLEGALS ON PATH TO GREEN CARD
MCCAIN, KENNEDY BILL WOULD PUT MILLIONS OF ILLEGALS ON PATH TO GREEN CARD
KENNEDY, MCCAIN BILL ADDRESSES IMMIGRANTS
KENNEDY, MCCAIN BILL ADDRESSES IMMIGRANTS
IMMIGRATION-REFORM-HNS
IMMIGRATION-REFORM-HNS
IMMIGRANT LABOR BILL CREATES 3-YEAR VISAS FOR GUEST WORKERS
IMMIGRANT LABOR BILL CREATES 3-YEAR VISAS FOR GUEST WORKERS
U.S. OFFICIALS, AFRICAN AMERICAN LEADERS SEEK APOLOGY OVER MEXICAN PRESIDENT'S REMARKS
U.S. OFFICIALS, AFRICAN AMERICAN LEADERS SEEK APOLOGY OVER MEXICAN PRESIDENT'S REMARKS
SMUGGLING OF IMMIGRANTS IS DETAILED AS TRIAL STARTS
SMUGGLING OF IMMIGRANTS IS DETAILED AS TRIAL STARTS
FOX MEETS JACKSON SEEKING TO EASE UPROAR OVER REMARKS
FOX MEETS JACKSON SEEKING TO EASE UPROAR OVER REMARKS
EDITORIAL: MAJOR IMMIGRATION SURGERY
EDITORIAL: MAJOR IMMIGRATION SURGERY
N.H. POLICE CHIEF'S TACTICS STIR A STORM ON IMMIGRATION
N.H. POLICE CHIEF'S TACTICS STIR A STORM ON IMMIGRATION
NH-IMMIGRATION-ART-BOS
NH-IMMIGRATION-ART-BOS
POST-9/11 PROGRAM MAY END FAMILY'S AMERICAN DREAM
POST-9/11 PROGRAM MAY END FAMILY'S AMERICAN DREAM
STRESSFUL LIVES BURDEN REFUGEES
STRESSFUL LIVES BURDEN REFUGEES
ECUADORANS LEAD DANBURY IMMIGRATION PROTEST RALLY
ECUADORANS LEAD DANBURY IMMIGRATION PROTEST RALLY
EARLY HEAT WAVE KILLS 12 ILLEGAL IMMIGRANTS IN THE ARIZONA DESERT
EARLY HEAT WAVE KILLS 12 ILLEGAL IMMIGRANTS IN THE ARIZONA DESERT
FEDERAL RESERVE PROGRAM GIVES BANKS A SHOT AT TRANSFERS TO MEXICO
FEDERAL RESERVE PROGRAM GIVES BANKS A SHOT AT TRANSFERS TO MEXICO
BILL WOULD FORCE SAVINGS ON MEDICAID SPENDING
BILL WOULD FORCE SAVINGS ON MEDICAID SPENDING
BILL BY GOP SENATORS INCREASES BORDER GUARDS; NEW SECURITY IS PART OF AN OVERALL IMMIGRATION PLAN
BILL BY GOP SENATORS INCREASES BORDER GUARDS; NEW SECURITY IS PART OF AN OVERALL IMMIGRATION PLAN
A BATTLE AGAINST ILLEGAL WORKERS, WITH AN UNLIKELY DRIVING FORCE
A BATTLE AGAINST ILLEGAL WORKERS, WITH AN UNLIKELY DRIVING FORCE
POLICE ACROSS U.S. DON'T CHECK IMMIGRANT STATUS DURING STOPS
POLICE ACROSS U.S. DON'T CHECK IMMIGRANT STATUS DURING STOPS
BOOK REVIEW: EXPLORING IMMIGRANT SMUGGLING TRAGEDY
BOOK REVIEW: EXPLORING IMMIGRANT SMUGGLING TRAGEDY
IMMIGRATION MAY BE MAJOR ISSUE IN 2008 ELECTION EUNICE MOSCOSO
IMMIGRATION MAY BE MAJOR ISSUE IN 2008 ELECTION EUNICE MOSCOSO
BULLDOGS SET PACE IN NCAAS
BULLDOGS SET PACE IN NCAAS
TEXAN PLANS TO BRING MINUTEMEN PATROLS TO MEXICAN BORDER
TEXAN PLANS TO BRING MINUTEMEN PATROLS TO MEXICAN BORDER
GEORGIA TO BATTLE JACKETS FOR TITLE
GEORGIA TO BATTLE JACKETS FOR TITLE
SOME SKILLED FOREIGNERS FIND JOBS SCARCE IN CANADA
SOME SKILLED FOREIGNERS FIND JOBS SCARCE IN CANADA
AT VATICAN'S DOORSTEP, A CONTEST FOR IMMIGRANT SOULS
AT VATICAN'S DOORSTEP, A CONTEST FOR IMMIGRANT SOULS
BABY SURVIVES AGAINST ALL ODDS
BABY SURVIVES AGAINST ALL ODDS
IDENTITY CRISIS: SOCIAL SECURITY NUMBERS FOR RENT
IDENTITY CRISIS: SOCIAL SECURITY NUMBERS FOR RENT
NATION PONDERS IMMIGRANT WORKER PARADOX
NATION PONDERS IMMIGRANT WORKER PARADOX
WEB CLASSES FROM MEXICO HELP MIGRANTS
WEB CLASSES FROM MEXICO HELP MIGRANTS
NUMBER OF NON-MEXICAN ALIENS CROSSING SOUTHERN BORDER SKYROCKETING
NUMBER OF NON-MEXICAN ALIENS CROSSING SOUTHERN BORDER SKYROCKETING
IMMIGRATION OFFICIALS SEEK EXPANSION OF PROGRAM THAT ALLOWS BORDER AGENTS TO QUICKLY DEPORT ILLEGAL IMMIGRANTS
IMMIGRATION OFFICIALS SEEK EXPANSION OF PROGRAM THAT ALLOWS BORDER AGENTS TO QUICKLY DEPORT ILLEGAL IMMIGRANTS
LAZARUS AT LARGE COLUMN HEALTH CARE A DRAG ON U.S. BUSINESS
LAZARUS AT LARGE COLUMN HEALTH CARE A DRAG ON U.S. BUSINESS
MOST ILLEGAL ALIENS FREED ON BAIL, OWN RECOGNIZANCE
MOST ILLEGAL ALIENS FREED ON BAIL, OWN RECOGNIZANCE
DELAY SAYS BUSH PROMISES BETTER EFFORT ON IMMIGRATION LAW
DELAY SAYS BUSH PROMISES BETTER EFFORT ON IMMIGRATION LAW
BUSH-IMMIGRATION-HNS
BUSH-IMMIGRATION-HNS
GROWTH RATE OF HISPANIC POPULATION IS RISING, CENSUS BUREAU SAYS
GROWTH RATE OF HISPANIC POPULATION IS RISING, CENSUS BUREAU SAYS
REPORT DESCRIBES IMMIGRANTS AS YOUNGER, MORE DIVERSE
REPORT DESCRIBES IMMIGRANTS AS YOUNGER, MORE DIVERSE
SHARED LANGUAGE (FOR USE
SHARED LANGUAGE (FOR USE
DIPLOMAT: MIGRANT BILL NEEDED
DIPLOMAT: MIGRANT BILL NEEDED
IMMIGRATION REFORM AT TOP OF MANY AGENDAS; SIMILAR PROPOSALS BY BUSH, SEN. CORNYN TO TACKLE GUEST WORKERS, BORDER SECURITY
IMMIGRATION REFORM AT TOP OF MANY AGENDAS; SIMILAR PROPOSALS BY BUSH, SEN. CORNYN TO TACKLE GUEST WORKERS, BORDER SECURITY
SOUTH TEXAS COUNTY OVERWHELMED BY ILLEGAL IMMIGRANTS
SOUTH TEXAS COUNTY OVERWHELMED BY ILLEGAL IMMIGRANTS
STUDY TRACKS SURGE IN ILLEGAL IMMIGRATION FROM MEXICO
STUDY TRACKS SURGE IN ILLEGAL IMMIGRATION FROM MEXICO
NO WORRIES AT PINEHURST FOR 'EL NINO'
NO WORRIES AT PINEHURST FOR 'EL NINO'
ONE IN 11 MEXICAN NATIVES IN U.S., HALF ILLEGAL
ONE IN 11 MEXICAN NATIVES IN U.S., HALF ILLEGAL
LOW-PROFILE KENTUCKY TOBACCO MAN BUYS UP TEXAS RANCH LAND
LOW-PROFILE KENTUCKY TOBACCO MAN BUYS UP TEXAS RANCH LAND
BOOK REVIEW: CREATING A NEW AMERICANISMO
BOOK REVIEW: CREATING A NEW AMERICANISMO
CORNYN-IMMIGRATION-HNS
CORNYN-IMMIGRATION-HNS
LAWMAKER SAYS ILLEGAL IMMIGRANTS SHOULDN'T COUNT IN THE CENSUS
LAWMAKER SAYS ILLEGAL IMMIGRANTS SHOULDN'T COUNT IN THE CENSUS
GEORGIA STATE LOOKS AT FOOTBALL
GEORGIA STATE LOOKS AT FOOTBALL
GARCIA HAS ALL THE SHOTS BUT NOT A MAJOR TITLE
GARCIA HAS ALL THE SHOTS BUT NOT A MAJOR TITLE
GUARDSMAN KILLED IN AFGHANISTAN BURIED
GUARDSMAN KILLED IN AFGHANISTAN BURIED
TWO IMMIGRATION PLANS TAKE SHAPE IN SENATE
TWO IMMIGRATION PLANS TAKE SHAPE IN SENATE
UP TO 64 LABORERS LIVED IN A SMALL HOUSE, AUTHORITIES SAY
UP TO 64 LABORERS LIVED IN A SMALL HOUSE, AUTHORITIES SAY
THE VALUE OF IMMIGRANTS
THE VALUE OF IMMIGRANTS
FEDS FAIL TO GO AFTER COMPANIES HIRING ILLEGAL IMMIGRANTS
FEDS FAIL TO GO AFTER COMPANIES HIRING ILLEGAL IMMIGRANTS
MINUTEMAN GROUP MAKES PLANS FOR TEXAS PATROL
MINUTEMAN GROUP MAKES PLANS FOR TEXAS PATROL
GEORGIA LAGS BEHIND IN LOCAL EMERGENCY PLANNING GROUPS
GEORGIA LAGS BEHIND IN LOCAL EMERGENCY PLANNING GROUPS
EDITORIAL: SHAM SANCTIONS
EDITORIAL: SHAM SANCTIONS
ON LONG ISLAND, A RAID STIRS DISPUTE OVER INFLUX OF IMMIGRANTS
ON LONG ISLAND, A RAID STIRS DISPUTE OVER INFLUX OF IMMIGRANTS
HISPANIC POLITICAL POWER LAGS BEHIND RECORD GROWTH , STUDY SAYS
HISPANIC POLITICAL POWER LAGS BEHIND RECORD GROWTH , STUDY SAYS
LEGISLATION TO LICENSE UNDOCUMENTED IMMIGRANTS MOVES FORWARD
LEGISLATION TO LICENSE UNDOCUMENTED IMMIGRANTS MOVES FORWARD
BUSH ADMINISTRATION BORDER SURVEY NOT RELEASED
BUSH ADMINISTRATION BORDER SURVEY NOT RELEASED
MEXICO TO LET MIGRANTS VOTE BY MAIL
MEXICO TO LET MIGRANTS VOTE BY MAIL
LAWMAKERS IN MEXICO APPROVE ABSENTEE VOTING FOR MIGRANTS
LAWMAKERS IN MEXICO APPROVE ABSENTEE VOTING FOR MIGRANTS
GARCIA: TOO GOOD TO BE TRUE?
GARCIA: TOO GOOD TO BE TRUE?
BUSH'S STAND ON IMMIGRATION RILES SOME OF THE PARTY'S BASE
BUSH'S STAND ON IMMIGRATION RILES SOME OF THE PARTY'S BASE
BRAZILIANS STREAMING INTO U.S. THROUGH MEXICAN BORDER
BRAZILIANS STREAMING INTO U.S. THROUGH MEXICAN BORDER
BUSH ADMINISTRATION SAYS MEXICAN STAMPS ARE INAPPROPRIATE
BUSH ADMINISTRATION SAYS MEXICAN STAMPS ARE INAPPROPRIATE
TECH ASSISTANT TAPPED FOR GEORGIA STATE AD
TECH ASSISTANT TAPPED FOR GEORGIA STATE AD
LONG ISLAND OFFICIALS TRY A DIFFERENT APPROACH TO IMMIGRANT CRACKDOWN
LONG ISLAND OFFICIALS TRY A DIFFERENT APPROACH TO IMMIGRANT CRACKDOWN
Figure 27: Visualization of a single article node and all of its neighboring article nodes.
documents to deﬁne a binary feature function φ. We add a constant feature ρ to φ, which
controls the overall degree of repulsion; large values of ρ make all documents more similar
to one another. We set ρ and the quality model hyperparameters to maximize a cosine
similarity evaluation metric (see Section 6.6.4), using the data from the ﬁrst half of 2005 as
a development set. Finally, we randomly project the diversity features from D ≈34, 500
to d = 50 dimensions. For all of the following experiments, we use k = 10 and R = 8. All
evaluation metrics we report are averaged over 100 random samples from the model.
Graph visualizations
In order to convey the scale and content of the graphs built
from news data, we provide some high-resolution renderings. Figure 27 shows the graph
neighborhood of a single article node from our development set. Each node represents an
article and is annotated with the corresponding headline; the size of each node reﬂects its
weight, as does the thickness of an edge. The horizontal position of a node corresponds to
the time at which the article was published, from left to right; the vertical positions are
optimized for readability. In the digital version of this paper, Figure 27 can be zoomed in
order to read the headlines; in hardcopy, however, it is likely to be illegible. As an alternative,
an online, zoomable version of the ﬁgure is available at http://zoom.it/GUCR.
Visualizing the entire graph is quite challenging since it contains tens of thousands of
nodes and millions of edges; placing such a ﬁgure in the paper would be impractical since
the computational demands of rendering it and the zooming depth required to explore it
103

would exceed the abilities of modern document viewers. Instead, we provide an online,
zoomable version based upon a high-resolution (540 megapixel) rendering, available at
http://zoom.it/jOKV. Even at this level of detail, only 1% of the edges are displayed;
otherwise they become visually indistinct. As in Figure 27, each node represents an article
and is sized according to its weight and overlaid with its headline. The horizontal position
corresponds to time, ranging from January 2005 (on the left) to June 2005 (on the right).
The vertical positions are determined by similarity to a set of threads sampled from the
k-SDPP, which are rendered in color.
Baselines
We will compare the k-SDPP model to two natural baselines.
k-means baseline. A simple method for this task is to split each six-month period of
articles into R equal-sized time slices, and then apply k-means clustering to each slice, using
cosine similarity at the clustering metric. We can then select the most central article from
each cluster to form the basis of a set of threads. The k articles chosen from time slice r are
matched one-to-one with those from slice r −1 by computing the pairing that maximizes the
average cosine similarity of the pairs—that is, the coherence of the threads. Repeating this
process for all r yields a set of k threads of length R, where no two threads will contain the
same article. However, because clustering is performed independently for each time slice, it
is likely that the threads will sometimes exhibit discontinuities when the articles chosen at
successive time slices do not naturally align.
DTM baseline. A natural extension, then, is the dynamic topic model (DTM) of Blei
and Laﬀerty [2006], which explicitly attempts to ﬁnd topics that are smooth through time.
We use publicly available code4 to ﬁt DTMs with the number of topics set to k and with
the data split into R equal time slices. We set the hyperparameters to maximize the cosine
similarity metric (see Section 6.6.4) on our development set. We then choose, for each topic
at each time step, the document with the highest per-word probability of being generated
by that topic. Documents from the same topic form a single thread.
Figure 28 shows some of the threads sampled randomly from the k-SDPP for our develop-
ment set, and Figure 29 shows the same for threads produced by the DTM baseline. An
obvious distinction is that topic model threads always span nearly the entire time period,
selecting one article per time slice as required by the form of the model, while the DPP can
select threads covering only the relevant span. Furthermore, the headlines in the ﬁgures
suggest that the k-SDPP produces more tightly focused, narrative threads due to its use of
the data graph, while the DTM threads, though topically related, tend not to describe a
single continuous news story. This distinction, which results from the fact that topic models
are not designed with threading in mind, and so do not take advantage of the explicit relation
information given by the graph, means that k-SDPP threads often form a signiﬁcantly more
coherent representation of the news collection.
Comparison to human summaries
We provide a quantitative evaluation of the threads
generated by our baselines and sampled from the k-SDPP by comparing them to a set
of human-generated news summaries. The human summaries are not threaded; they are
4http://code.google.com/p/princeton-statistical-learning/
104

Jan 08
Jan 28
Feb 17
Mar 09
Mar 29
Apr 18
May 08
May 28
Jun 17
pope vatican church parkinson 
israel palestinian iraqi israeli gaza abbas baghdad 
owen nominees senate democrats judicial filibusters 
social tax security democrats rove accounts 
iraq iraqi killed baghdad arab marines deaths forces 
Thread: pope vatican church parkinson
Feb 24: Parkinson’s Disease Increases Risks to Pope
Feb 26: Pope’s Health Raises Questions About His Ability to Lead
Mar 13: Pope Returns Home After 18 Days at Hospital
Apr 01: Pope’s Condition Worsens as World Prepares for End of Papacy
Apr 02: Pope, Though Gravely Ill, Utters Thanks for Prayers
Apr 18: Europeans Fast Falling Away from Church
Apr 20: In Developing World, Choice [of Pope] Met with Skepticism
May 18: Pope Sends Message with Choice of Name
Figure 28: A set of ﬁve news threads randomly sampled from a k-SDPP for the ﬁrst half of
2005. Above, the threads are shown on a timeline with the most salient words superimposed;
below, the dates and headlines from a single thread are listed.
105

Jan 08
Jan 28
Feb 17
Mar 09
Mar 29
Apr 18
May 08
May 28
Jun 17
cancer heart breast women disease aspirin risk study 
palestinian israel baghdad palestinians sunni korea gaza israeli 
social security accounts retirement benefits tax workers 401 payroll 
mets rangers dodgers delgado martinez astacio angels mientkiewicz 
hotel kitchen casa inches post shade monica closet 
Thread: cancer heart breast women disease aspirin risk study
Jan 11: Study Backs Meat, Colon Tumor Link
Feb 07: Patients—and Many Doctors—Still Don’t Know How Often Women
Get Heart Disease
Mar 07: Aspirin Therapy Beneﬁts Women, but Not in the Way It Aids Men
Mar 16: Study Shows Radiation Therapy Doesn’t Increase Heart Disease Risk
for Breast Cancer Patients
Apr 11: Personal Health: Women Struggle for Parity of the Heart
May 16: Black Women More Likely to Die from Breast Cancer
May 24: Studies Bolster Diet, Exercise for Breast Cancer Patients
Jun 21: Another Reason Fish is Good for You
Figure 29: A set of ﬁve news threads generated by the dynamic topic model for the ﬁrst
half of 2005. Above, the threads are shown on a timeline with the most salient words
superimposed; below, the dates and headlines from a single thread are listed.
106

ROUGE-1
ROUGE-2
ROUGE-SU4
System
Cos-sim
F
Prec/ Rec
F
Prec/ Rec
F
Prec/ Rec
k-means
29.9
16.5
17.3/15.8
0.695
0.73/0.67
3.76
3.94/3.60
DTM
27.0
14.7
15.5/14.0
0.750
0.81/0.70
3.44
3.63/3.28
k-SDPP
33.2
17.2
17.7/16.7
0.892
0.92/0.87
3.98
4.11/3.87
Table 10: Similarity of automatically generated timelines to human summaries.
Bold
entries are signiﬁcantly higher than others in the column at 99% conﬁdence, veriﬁed using
bootstrapping.
System
Rating
Interlopers
k-means
2.73
0.71
DTM
3.19
1.10
k-SDPP
3.31
1.15
Table 11: Rating: average coherence score from 1 (worst) to 5 (best). Interlopers: average
number of interloper articles identiﬁed (out of 2). Bold entries are signiﬁcantly higher with
95% conﬁdence.
ﬂat, approximately daily news summaries found in the Agence France-Presse portion of the
Gigaword corpus, distinguished by their “multi” type tag. The summaries generally cover
world news, which is only a subset of the contents of our dataset. Nonetheless, they allow
us to provide an extrinsic evaluation for this novel task without generating gold standard
timelines manually, which is a diﬃcult task given the size of the corpus. We compute four
metrics:
• Cosine similarity. We concatenate the human summaries over each six-month period
to obtain a target tf-idf vector, concatenate the set of threads to be evaluated to obtain
a predicted tf-idf vector, and then compute the cosine similarity (in percent) between
the target and predicted vectors. All hyperparameters are chosen to optimize this
metric on a validation set.
• ROUGE-1, 2, and SU4. As described in Section 4.2.1, ROUGE is an automatic
evaluation metric for text summarization based on n-gram overlap statistics [Lin, 2004].
We report three standard variants.
Table 10 shows the results of these comparisons, averaged over all six half-year inter-
vals. Under each metric, the k-SDPP produces threads that more closely resemble human
summaries.
Mechanical Turk evaluation
An important distinction between the baselines and the
k-SDPP is that the former are topic-oriented, choosing articles that relate to broad subject
areas, while the k-SDPP approach is story-oriented, chaining together articles with direct
individual relationships. An example of this distinction can be seen in Figures 28 and 29.
To obtain a large-scale evaluation of this type of thread coherence, we employ Mechanical
Turk, on online marketplace for inexpensively and eﬃciently completing tasks requiring
107

Figure 30: A screenshot of the Mechanical Turk task presented to annotators.
human judgment. We asked Turkers to read the headlines and ﬁrst few sentences of each
article in a timeline and then rate the overall narrative coherence of the timeline on a scale
of 1 (“the articles are totally unrelated”) to 5 (“the articles tell a single clear story”). Five
separate Turkers rated each timeline. The average ratings are shown in the left column of
Table 11; the k-SDPP timelines are rated as signiﬁcantly more coherent, while k-means does
poorly since it has no way to ensure that clusters are similar between time slices.
In addition, we asked Turkers to evaluate threads implicitly by performing a second
task. (This also had the side beneﬁt of ensuring that Turkers were engaged in the rating
task and did not enter random decisions.) We displayed timelines into which two additional
“interloper” articles selected at random had been inserted, and asked users to remove the
two articles that they thought should be removed to improve the ﬂow of the timeline. A
screenshot of the task is provided in Figure 30. Intuitively, the true interlopers should be
selected more often when the original timeline is coherent. The average number of interloper
articles correctly identiﬁed is shown in the right column of Table 11.
Runtime
Finally, assuming that tf-idf and feature values have been computed in advance
(this process requires approximately 160 seconds), we report in Table 12 the time required
to produce a set of threads on the development set. This measurement includes clustering
for the k-means baseline, model ﬁtting for the DTM baseline, and random projections,
computation of the covariance matrix, and sampling for the k-SDPP. The tests were run
on a machine with eight Intel Xeon E5450 cores and 32G of memory. Thanks to the use of
random projections, the k-SDPP is not only the most faithful to human news summaries,
108

System
Runtime (s)
k-means
625.63
DTM
19,433.80
k-SDPP
252.38
Table 12: Running time for the tested methods.
but also the fastest by a large margin.
7
Conclusion
We believe that DPPs oﬀer exciting new possibilities for a wide range of practical applications.
Unlike heuristic diversiﬁcation techniques, DPPs provide coherent probabilistic semantics,
and yet they do not suﬀer from the computational issues that plague existing models
when negative correlations arise. Before concluding, we brieﬂy mention two open technical
questions, as well as some possible directions for future research.
7.1
Open question: concavity of entropy
The Shannon entropy of the DPP with marginal kernel K is given by
H(K) = −
X
Y ⊆Y
P(Y ) log P(Y ) .
(289)
Conjecture 7.1 (Lyons [2003]). H(K) is concave in K.
While numerical simulation strongly suggests that the conjecture is true, to our knowledge
no proof currently exists.
7.2
Open question: higher-order sums
In order to calculate, for example, the Hellinger distance between a pair of DPPs, it would
be useful to be able to compute quantities of the form
X
Y ⊆Y
det(LY )p
(290)
for p > 1. To our knowledge it is not currently known whether it is possible to compute
these quantities eﬃciently.
7.3
Research directions
A variety of interesting machine learning questions remain for future research.
• Would DPPs based on Hermitian or asymmetric kernels oﬀer worthwhile modeling
advantages?
109

• Is there a simple characterization of the conditional independence relations encoded
by a DPP?
• Can we perform DPP inference under more complicated constraints on allowable sets?
(For instance, if the items correspond to edges in a graph, we might only consider sets
that comprise a valid matching.)
• How can we learn the similarity kernel for a DPP (in addition to the quality model)
from labeled training data?
• How can we eﬃciently (perhaps approximately) work with SDPPs over loopy factor
graphs?
• Can SDPPs be used to diversify n-best lists and improve reranking performance, for
instance in parsing or machine translation?
References
A.M. Abdelbar and S.M. Hedetniemi. Approximating maps for belief networks is np-hard
and other theorems. Artiﬁcial Intelligence, 102(1):21–38, 1998.
J. Allan, R. Gupta, and V. Khandelwal. Temporal Summaries of New Topics. In Proc.
SIGIR, 2001.
AJ Baddeley and MNM Van Lieshout. Area-interaction point processes. Annals of the
Institute of Statistical Mathematics, 47(4):601–619, 1995.
F.B. Baker and M.R. Harwell.
Computing elementary symmetric functions and their
derivatives: A didactic. Applied Psychological Measurement, 20(2):169, 1996.
A.I. Barvinok. Computational complexity of immanents and representations of the full linear
group. Functional Analysis and Its Applications, 24(2):144–145, 1990.
K. Berthelsen and J. Møller. Bayesian analysis of markov point processes. Case studies in
spatial point process modeling, pages 85–97, 2006.
D. Bertsekas. Nonlinear Programming. Athena Scientiﬁc, Belmont, MA, 1999.
J. Besag. Some methods of statistical analysis for spatial data. Bulletin of the International
Statistical Institute, 47(2):77–92, 1977.
J. Besag and P.J. Green. Spatial statistics and bayesian computation. Journal of the Royal
Statistical Society. Series B (Methodological), pages 25–37, 1993.
J. Besag, R. Milne, and S. Zachary. Point process limits of lattice processes. Journal of
Applied Probability, pages 210–216, 1982.
D.M. Blei and J.D. Laﬀerty. Dynamic topic models. In Proceedings of the 23rd international
conference on Machine learning, pages 113–120. ACM, 2006.
110

A. Borodin and G. Olshanski. Distributions on partitions, point processes, and the hyperge-
ometric kernel. Communications in Mathematical Physics, 211(2):335–358, 2000.
A. Borodin and A. Soshnikov. Janossy densities. i. determinantal ensembles. Journal of
statistical physics, 113(3):595–610, 2003.
A. Borodin, P. Diaconis, and J. Fulman. On adding a list of numbers (and other one-
dependent determinantal processes). AMERICAN MATHEMATICAL SOCIETY, 47(4):
639–670, 2010.
Alexei Borodin. Determinantal point processes, 2009. URL http://arxiv.org/abs/0911.
1153.
Alexei Borodin and Eric Rains. Eynardmehta theorem, schur process, and their pfaﬃan
analogs. Journal of Statistical Physics, 121:291–317, 2005. ISSN 0022-4715. 10.1007/s10955-
005-7583-z.
E. Boros and P.L. Hammer. Pseudo-boolean optimization. Discrete Applied Mathematics,
123(1-3):155–225, 2002.
P. Bratley and B.L. Fox. Algorithm 659: Implementing sobol’s quasirandom sequence
generator. ACM Transactions on Mathematical Software (TOMS), 14(1):88–100, 1988.
J.L. Brylinski and R. Brylinski. Complexity and completeness of immanants. Arxiv preprint
cs/0301024, 2003.
P. B¨urgisser. The computational complexity of immanants. SIAM Journal on Computing,
30:1023, 2000.
R. Burton and R. Pemantle. Local characteristics, entropy and limit theorems for spanning
trees and domino tilings via transfer-impedances.
The Annals of Probability, pages
1329–1371, 1993.
J. Canny. A computational approach to edge detection. Pattern Analysis and Machine
Intelligence, IEEE Transactions on, 6:679–698, 1986.
J. Carbonell and J. Goldstein. The use of MMR, diversity-based reranking for reordering
documents and producing summaries. In Proc. SIGIR, 1998.
A. Cayley. On the theory of determinants. Transaction of the Cambridge Philosophical
Society, 8(1843):1–16, 1843.
C. Chekuri, J. Vondr´ak, and R. Zenklusen. Submodular function maximization via the
multilinear relaxation and contention resolution schemes. Arxiv preprint arXiv:1105.4593,
2011.
H. Chen and D.R. Karger. Less is more: probabilistic models for retrieving fewer relevant
documents. In Proce. SIGIR, pages 429–436, 2006.
H. Chieu and Y. Lee. Query Based Event Extraction along a Timeline. In Proc. SIGIR,
2004.
111

A. C¸ivril and M. Magdon-Ismail. On selecting a maximum volume sub-matrix of a matrix
and related problems. Theoretical Computer Science, 410(47-49):4801–4811, 2009.
J.M. Conroy, J.D. Schlesinger, J. Goldstein, and D.P. Oleary. Left-brain/right-brain multi-
document summarization. In Proceedings of the Document Understanding Conference
(DUC 2004), 2004.
G.F. Cooper. The computational complexity of probabilistic inference using bayesian belief
networks. Artiﬁcial intelligence, 42(2-3):393–405, 1990.
P. Dagum and M. Luby. Approximating probabilistic inference in bayesian belief networks
is np-hard. Artiﬁcial intelligence, 60(1):141–153, 1993.
D.J. Daley and D. Vere-Jones. An introduction to the theory of point processes: volume I:
elementary theory and methods. Springer, 2003.
D.J. Daley and D. Vere-Jones. An introduction to the theory of point processes: General
theory and structure, volume 2. Springer Verlag, 2008.
H.T. Dang. Overview of DUC 2005. In Proce. DUC, 2005.
A. Deshpande and L. Rademacher.
Eﬃcient volume sampling for row/column subset
selection. In 2010 IEEE 51st Annual Symposium on Foundations of Computer Science,
pages 329–338. IEEE, 2010.
P. Diaconis. Patterns in eigenvalues: the 70th josiah willard gibbs lecture. BULLETIN-
AMERICAN MATHEMATICAL SOCIETY, 40(2):155–178, 2003.
P. Diaconis and S.N. Evans. Immanants and ﬁnite point processes. Journal of Combinatorial
Theory, Series A, 91(1-2):305–321, 2000.
P.J. Diggle, D.J. Gates, and A. Stibbard. A nonparametric estimator for pairwise-interaction
point processes. Biometrika, 74(4):763–770, 1987.
P.J. Diggle, T. Fiksel, P. Grabarnik, Y. Ogata, D. Stoyan, and M. Tanemura. On parameter
estimation for pairwise interaction point processes. International Statistical Review/Revue
Internationale de Statistique, pages 99–117, 1994.
F.J. Dyson.
Statistical theory of the energy levels of complex systems. i.
Journal of
Mathematical Physics, 3:140–156, 1962a.
F.J. Dyson. Statistical theory of the energy levels of complex systems. ii. Journal of
Mathematical Physics, 3(157–165), 1962b.
F.J. Dyson. Statistical theory of the energy levels of complex systems. iii. Journal of
Mathematical Physics, 3:166–175, 1962c.
G. Erkan and D.R. Radev. LexRank: Graph-based lexical centrality as salience in text
summarization. Journal of Artiﬁcial Intelligence Research, 22(1):457–479, 2004. ISSN
1076-9757.
112

S.N. Evans and A. Gottlieb. Hyperdeterminantal point processes. Metrika, 69(2):85–99,
2009.
J. Feder. Random sequential adsorption. Journal of Theoretical Biology, 87(2):237–254,
1980.
U. Feige. A threshold of ln n for approximating set cover. Journal of the ACM (JACM), 45
(4):634–652, 1998.
U. Feige, V.S. Mirrokni, and J. Vondrak. Maximizing non-monotone submodular functions.
In Foundations of Computer Science, 2007. FOCS’07. 48th Annual IEEE Symposium on,
pages 461–471. IEEE, 2007.
M. Feldman, J. Naor, and R. Schwartz. Nonmonotone submodular maximization via a
structural continuous greedy algorithm. Automata, Languages and Programming, pages
342–353, 2011a.
M. Feldman, J.S. Naor, and R. Schwartz.
A uniﬁed continuous greedy algorithm for
submodular maximization. In Foundations of Computer Science (FOCS), 2011 IEEE
52nd Annual Symposium on, pages 570–579. IEEE, 2011b.
P.F. Felzenszwalb and D.P. Huttenlocher. Pictorial structures for object recognition. Inter-
national Journal of Computer Vision, 61(1):55–79, 2005. ISSN 0920-5691.
L. Finegold and J.T. Donnell. Maximum density of random placing of membrane particles.
Nature, 1979.
MA Fischler and RA Elschlager. The representation and matching of pictorial structures.
IEEE Transactions on Computers, 100(22), 1973.
M.L. Fisher, G.L. Nemhauser, and L.A. Wolsey. An analysis of approximations for maximizing
submodular set functionsii. Polyhedral combinatorics, pages 73–87, 1978.
I.M. Gel’fand. Lectures on linear algebra. Dover, 1989. ISBN 0486660826.
P.E. Genest, G. Lapalme, and M. Yousﬁ-Monod. Hextac: the creation of a manual extractive
run. In Proceedings of the Second Text Analysis Conference, Gaithersburg, Maryland,
USA: National Institute of Standards and Technology, 2010.
S.O. Gharan and J. Vondr´ak. Submodular maximization by simulated annealing. In Proc.
Soda, pages 1098–1116, 2011.
J. Gillenwater, A. Kulesza, and B. Taskar. Discovering diverse and salient threads in
document collections. In Proceedings of the 2012 Conference on Empirical Methods in
Machine Learning, 2012.
J. Ginibre. Statistical ensembles of complex, quaternion, and real matrices. Journal of
Mathematical Physics, 6:440, 1965.
V. Goel and W.J. Byrne. Minimum bayes-risk automatic speech recognition. Computer
Speech & Language, 14(2):115–135, 2000.
113

D. Graﬀand C. Cieri. English Gigaword, 2009.
G. R. Grimmett. A theorem about random ﬁelds. Bulletin of the London Mathematical
Society, 5(13):81–84, 1973.
R. Grone and R. Merris. An algorithm for the second immanant. Math. Comp, 43:589–591,
1984.
O. H¨aggstr¨om, M.C.N.M. Van Lieshout, and J. Møller. Characterization results and markov
chain monte carlo algorithms including exact simulation for some spatial point processes.
Bernoulli, 5(4):641–658, 1999.
J.H. Halton. On the eﬃciency of certain quasi-random sequences of points in evaluating
multi-dimensional integrals. Numerische Mathematik, 2(1):84–90, 1960.
W. Hartmann. On the complexity of immanants. Linear and Multilinear Algebra, 18(2):
127–140, 1985.
E.L. Hinrichsen, J. Feder, and T. Jøssang. Geometry of random sequential adsorption.
Journal of statistical physics, 44(5):793–827, 1986.
E. Hlawka. Funktionen von beschr¨ankter variatiou in der theorie der gleichverteilung. Annali
di Matematica Pura ed Applicata, 54(1):325–333, 1961.
J.B. Hough, M. Krishnapur, Y. Peres, and B. Vir´ag. Determinantal processes and indepen-
dence. Probability Surveys, 3:206–229, 2006.
M.L. Huber and R.L. Wolpert. Likelihood-based inference for mat´ern type-iii repulsive point
processes. Advances in Applied Probability, 41(4):958–977, 2009.
H. Ishikawa. Exact optimization for markov random ﬁelds with convex priors. Pattern
Analysis and Machine Intelligence, IEEE Transactions on, 25(10):1333–1336, 2003.
J.L. Jensen and J. Moller. Pseudolikelihood for exponential family models of spatial point
processes. The Annals of Applied Probability, 1(3):445–461, 1991.
K. Johansson. Non-intersecting paths, random tilings and random matrices. Probability
theory and related ﬁelds, 123(2):225–280, 2002.
K. Johansson. Determinantal processes with number variance saturation. Communications
in mathematical physics, 252(1):111–148, 2004.
K. Johansson. The arctic circle boundary and the airy process. The annals of probability, 33
(1):1–30, 2005a.
K. Johansson.
Random matrices and determinantal processes.
Arxiv preprint math-
ph/0510038, 2005b.
W.B. Johnson and J. Lindenstrauss. Extensions of lipschitz mappings into a hilbert space.
Contemporary mathematics, 26(189-206):1–1, 1984.
114

C.W. Ko, J. Lee, and M. Queyranne. An exact algorithm for maximum entropy sampling.
Operations Research, 43(4):684–691, 1995. ISSN 0030-364X.
D. Koller and N. Friedman. Probabilistic Graphical Models: Principles and Techniques. The
MIT Press, 2009.
V. Kolmogorov and R. Zabih. What energy functions can be minimized via graph cuts?
IEEE transactions on pattern analysis and machine intelligence, pages 147–159, 2004.
A. Krause and C. Guestrin. A note on the budgeted maximization of submodular functions.
Technical Rep. No. CMU-CALD, 5:103, 2005.
A. Kulesza and F. Pereira. Structured learning with approximate inference. Advances in
neural information processing systems, 20:785–792, 2008.
A. Kulesza and B. Taskar. k-DPPs: ﬁxed-size determinantal point processes. In Proceedings
of the 28th International Conference on Machine Learning, 2011a.
A. Kulesza and B. Taskar. Learning determinantal point processes. In Proceedings of the
27th Conference on Uncertainty in Artiﬁcial Intelligence, 2011b.
Alex Kulesza and Ben Taskar. Structured determinantal point processes. In Proc. Neural
Information Processing Systems, 2010.
Alex Kulesza, Jennifer Gillenwater, and Ben Taskar.
Near-optimal map inference for
determinantal point processes. In Proc. Neural Information Processing Systems, 2012.
S. Kumar and W. Byrne. Minimum bayes-risk word alignments of bilingual texts. In
Proceedings of the ACL-02 conference on Empirical methods in natural language processing-
Volume 10, pages 140–147. Association for Computational Linguistics, 2002.
S. Kumar and W. Byrne. Minimum bayes-risk decoding for statistical machine translation.
In Proceedings of HLT-NAACL, pages 169–176, 2004.
J.D. Laﬀerty, A. McCallum, and F.C.N. Pereira. Conditional random ﬁelds: Probabilistic
models for segmenting and labeling sequence data. In Proceedings of the Eighteenth Inter-
national Conference on Machine Learning, pages 282–289. Morgan Kaufmann Publishers
Inc., 2001.
S.L. Lauritzen and D.J. Spiegelhalter. Local computations with probabilities on graphical
structures and their application to expert systems. Journal of the Royal Statistical Society.
Series B (Methodological), pages 157–224, 1988.
J. Lee, V.S. Mirrokni, V. Nagarajan, and M. Sviridenko.
Non-monotone submodular
maximization under matroid and knapsack constraints. In Proceedings of the 41st annual
ACM symposium on Theory of computing, pages 323–332. ACM, 2009.
J. Leskovec, L. Backstrom, and J. Kleinberg. Meme-tracking and the Dynamics of the News
Cycle. In Proc. KDD, 2009.
115

Z. Li and J. Eisner. First-and second-order expectation semirings with applications to
minimum-risk training on translation forests. In Proc. EMNLP, 2009.
C.Y. Lin. Rouge: A package for automatic evaluation of summaries. In Proceedings of the
workshop on text summarization branches out (WAS 2004), pages 25–26, 2004.
Hui Lin and JeﬀBilmes. Multi-document summarization via budgeted maximization of
submodular functions. In Proc. NAACL/HLT, 2010.
Hui Lin and JeﬀBilmes.
Learning mixtures of submodular shells with application to
document summarization. In Uncertainty in Artiﬁcial Intelligence (UAI), Catalina Island,
USA, July 2012. AUAI.
D.G. Lowe. Object recognition from local scale-invariant features. In Proc. ICCV, 1999.
R. Lyons. Determinantal probability measures. Publications Math´ematiques de l’IH´ES, 98
(1):167–212, 2003.
O. Macchi. The coincidence approach to stochastic point processes. Advances in Applied
Probability, 7(1):83–122, 1975.
A. Magen and A. Zouzias. Near optimal dimensionality reductions that preserve volumes. Ap-
proximation, Randomization and Combinatorial Optimization. Algorit hms and Techniques,
pages 523–534, 2008.
B. Mat´ern. Spatial variation. stochastic models and their application to some problems in
forest surveys and other sampling investigations. Meddelanden fran statens Skogsforskn-
ingsinstitut, 49(5), 1960.
B. Mat´ern. Spatial variation. Springer-Verlag, 1986.
A. McCallum, K. Nigam, J. Rennie, and K. Seymore. Automating the Construction of
Internet Portals with Machine Learning. Information Retrieval Journal, 3:127–163, 2000.
P. McCullagh and J. Møller. The permanental process. Advances in applied probability,
pages 873–888, 2006.
M.L. Mehta and M. Gaudin. On the density of eigenvalues of a random matrix. Nuclear
Physics, 18(0):420 – 427, 1960. ISSN 0029-5582. doi: 10.1016/0029-5582(60)90414-4. URL
http://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/0029558260904144.
W. Mei and C. Zhai. Discovering Evolutionary Theme Patterns From Text: An Exploration
of T emporal Text Mining. In Proc. KDD, 2005.
J. Møller and R.P. Waagepetersen. Statistical inference and simulation for spatial point
processes, volume 100. CRC Press, 2004.
J. Møller and R.P. Waagepetersen. Modern statistics for spatial point processes*. Scandina-
vian Journal of Statistics, 34(4):643–684, 2007.
116

J. Møller, M.L. Huber, and R.L. Wolpert. Perfect simulation and moment properties for the
mat´ern type iii process. Stochastic Processes and their Applications, 120(11):2142–2158,
2010.
K.P. Murphy, Y. Weiss, and M.I. Jordan. Loopy belief propagation for approximate inference:
An empirical study. In Proceedings of the Fifteenth conference on Uncertainty in artiﬁcial
intelligence, pages 467–475. Morgan Kaufmann Publishers Inc., 1999.
G.L. Nemhauser, L.A. Wolsey, and M.L. Fisher. An analysis of approximations for maximizing
submodular set functionsi. Mathematical Programming, 14(1):265–294, 1978.
Ani Nenkova, Lucy Vanderwende, and Kathleen McKeown. A compositional context sensitive
multi-document summarizer: exploring the factors that inﬂuence summarization. In Proc.
SIGIR, 2006.
H. Niederreiter. Quasi-Monte Carlo Methods. Wiley Online Library, 1992.
J. Nocedal. Updating quasi-Newton matrices with limited storage. Mathematics of computa-
tion, 35(151):773–782, 1980.
Y. Ogata and M. Tanemura. Likelihood analysis of spatial point patterns. Journal of the
Royal Statistical Society. Series B (Methodological), pages 496–518, 1984.
Y. Ogata and M. Tanemura. Estimation of interaction potentials of marked spatial point
patterns through the maximum likelihood method. Biometrics, pages 421–433, 1985.
A. Okounkov. Inﬁnite wedge and random partitions. Selecta Mathematica, New Series, 7(1):
57–81, 2001.
A. Okounkov and N. Reshetikhin. Correlation function of schur process with application
to local geometry of a random 3-dimensional young diagram. JOURNAL-AMERICAN
MATHEMATICAL SOCIETY, 16(3):581–604, 2003.
A. Oliva and A. Torralba. Building the gist of a scene: The role of global image features in
recognition. Progress in brain research, 155:23–36, 2006. ISSN 0079-6123.
J. Pearl. Reverend bayes on inference engines: A distributed hierarchical approach. In
Proceedings of the AAAI National Conference on AI, pages 133–136, 1982.
C.J. Preston. Random ﬁelds. Springer-Verlag New York, 1976.
F. Radlinski, R. Kleinberg, and T. Joachims. Learning diverse rankings with multi-armed
bandits. In Proc. ICML, 2008.
K. Raman, P. Shivaswamy, and T. Joachims. Learning to diversify from implicit feedback.
In WSDM Workshop on Diversity in Document Retrieval, 2012.
JJ Ramsden. Review of new experimental techniques for investigating random sequential
adsorption. Journal of statistical physics, 73(5):853–877, 1993.
B.D. Ripley. Statistical inference for spatial processes. Cambridge Univ Pr, 1991.
117

BD Ripley and FP Kelly. Markov point processes. Journal of the London Mathematical
Society, 2(1):188, 1977.
Ben Sapp, Chris Jordan, and Ben Taskar. Adaptive pose priors for pictorial structures.
In IEEE Computer Society Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition
(CVPR’10), 2010.
A. Schrijver.
A combinatorial algorithm minimizing submodular functions in strongly
polynomial time. Journal of Combinatorial Theory, Series B, 80(2):346–355, 2000.
D. Shahaf and C. Guestrin. Connecting the Dots Between News Articles. In KDD, 2010.
D. Shahaf, C. Guestrin, and E. Horvitz. Trains of Thought: Generating Information Maps.
In Proc. WWW, 2012.
S.E. Shimony. Finding maps for belief networks is np-hard. Artiﬁcial Intelligence, 68(2):
399–410, 1994.
T. Shirai and Y. Takahashi. Fermion process and fredholm determinant. In Proceedings of
the second ISAAC Congress, volume 1, pages 15–23. Kluwer Academic Pub, 2000.
T. Shirai and Y. Takahashi. Random point ﬁelds associated with certain fredholm determi-
nants i: fermion, poisson and boson point processes. Journal of Functional Analysis, 205
(2):414–463, 2003a.
T. Shirai and Y. Takahashi. Random point ﬁelds associated with certain fredholm determi-
nants ii: Fermion shifts and their ergodic and gibbs properties. The Annals of Probability,
31(3):1533–1564, 2003b.
I.M. Sobol. On the distribution of points in a cube and the approximate evaluation of
integrals. Zhurnal Vychislitel’noi Matematiki i Matematicheskoi Fiziki, 7(4):784–802,
1967.
I.M. Sobol. On quasi-monte carlo integrations. Mathematics and Computers in Simulation,
47(2):103–112, 1998.
D. Sontag and T. Jaakkola. New outer bounds on the marginal polytope. Advances in
Neural Information Processing Systems, 20:1393–1400, 2007.
A. Soshnikov. Determinantal random point ﬁelds. Russian Mathematical Surveys, 55:923,
2000.
D. Stoyan and H. Stoyan. On one of mat´ern’s hard-core point process models. Mathematische
Nachrichten, 122(1):205–214, 1985.
D.J. Strauss. A model for clustering. Biometrika, 62(2):467–475, 1975.
A. Swaminathan, C.V. Mathew, and D. Kirovski. Essential pages. In Proceedings of the 2009
IEEE/WIC/ACM International Joint Conference on Web Intelligence and Intelligent
Agent Technology-Volume 01, pages 173–182. IEEE Computer Society, 2009.
118

R. Swan and D. Jensen. TimeMines: Constructing Timelines with Statistical Models of
Word Us age. In Proc. KDD, 2000.
R.H. Swendsen. Dynamics of random sequential adsorption. Physical Review A, 24(1):504,
1981.
M. Tanemura. On random complete packing by discs. Annals of the Institute of Statistical
Mathematics, 31(1):351–365, 1979.
Jok M. Tang and Yousef Saad. A probing method for computing the diagonal of a matrix
inverse. Numerical Linear Algebra with Applications, 2011.
Terence Tao. Determinantal processes. http://terrytao.wordpress.com/2009/08/23/
determinantal-processes/, August 2009.
B. Taskar, V. Chatalbashev, and D. Koller. Learning associative markov networks. In
Proceedings of the twenty-ﬁrst international conference on Machine learning, page 102.
ACM, 2004.
L.G. Valiant. The complexity of computing the permanent. Theoretical computer science, 8
(2):189–201, 1979.
MNM Van Lieshout. Markov point processes and their applications. Recherche, 67:02, 2000.
V.N. Vapnik. The nature of statistical learning theory. Springer Verlag, 2000.
A. Vedaldi and B. Fulkerson. VLFeat: An open and portable library of computer vision
algorithms. http://www.vlfeat.org/, 2008.
S.S. Vempala. The random projection method, volume 65. Amer Mathematical Society, 2004.
D. Vere-Jones. Alpha-permanents and their applications to multivariate gamma, negative
binomial and ordinary binomial distributions. New Zealand J. Math, 26:125–149, 1997.
J. Vondr´ak, C. Chekuri, and R. Zenklusen. Submodular function maximization via the
multilinear relaxation and contention resolution schemes. In Proc. STOC, pages 783–792.
ACM, 2011.
C. Wayne. Multilingual Topic Detection and Tracking: Successful Research Enabled by
Corpora and Evaluation. In Proc. LREC, 2000.
R. Yan, X. Wan, J. Otterbacher, L. Kong, X. Li, and Y. Zhang. Evolutionary Timeline
Summarization: A Balanced Optimization Framewo rk via Iterative Substitution. In Proc.
SIGIR, 2011.
C. Yanover and Y. Weiss. Approximate inference and protein folding. Advances in neural
information processing systems, 15:1457–1464, 2002.
C. Yanover, T. Meltzer, and Y. Weiss. Linear programming relaxations and belief propagation–
an empirical study. The Journal of Machine Learning Research, 7:1887–1907, 2006.
119

Y. Yue and T. Joachims. Predicting diverse subsets using structural SVMs. In Proc. ICML,
2008.
C.X. Zhai, W.W. Cohen, and J. Laﬀerty. Beyond independent relevance: methods and
evaluation metrics for subtopic retrieval. In Proceedings of the 26th annual international
ACM SIGIR conference on Research and development in informaion retrieval, pages 10–17.
ACM, 2003.
120
