Cost-eﬃcient segmentation of electron
microscopy images using active learning⋆
Joris Roels1,2[0000−0002−2058−8134] and Yvan Saeys1,2[0000−0002−0415−1506]
1 Department of Applied Mathematics, Computer Science and Statistics, Ghent
University, Ghent, Belgium
{jorisb.roels, yvan.saeys}@ugent.be
2 Inﬂammation Research Center, Flanders Institute for Biotechnology, Ghent,
Belgium
Abstract. Over the last decade, electron microscopy has improved up to
a point that generating high quality gigavoxel sized datasets only requires
a few hours. Automated image analysis, particularly image segmentation,
however, has not evolved at the same pace. Even though state-of-the-
art methods such as U-Net and DeepLab have improved segmentation
performance substantially, the required amount of labels remains too
expensive. Active learning is the subﬁeld in machine learning that aims
to mitigate this burden by selecting the samples that require labeling in a
smart way. Many techniques have been proposed, particularly for image
classiﬁcation, to increase the steepness of learning curves. In this work,
we extend these techniques to deep CNN based image segmentation.
Our experiments on three diﬀerent electron microscopy datasets show
that active learning can improve segmentation quality by 10 to 15% in
terms of Jaccard score compared to standard randomized sampling.
Keywords: Electron microscopy · Image segmentation · Active learn-
ing.
1
Introduction
Semantic image segmentation, the task of assigning pixel-level object labels to
an image, is a fundamental task in many applications and one of the most chal-
lenging problems in generic computer vision. Particularly in biomedical imaging
such as electron microscopy (EM), where annotated data is very sparsely avail-
able and image data contains high resolution (≈5 nm3) and ultrastructural
content. Nevertheless, deep learning has caused signiﬁcant improvements in this
particular research domain, over the last years [6,11,8].
Even though the impressive advances that have been made so far, state-of-
the-art techniques mostly rely on large annotated datasets. This is an impractical
assumption and only satisﬁed for particular use-cases such as e.g. neuron seg-
mentation [2]. For segmentation of alternative classes, research often falls back
⋆We gratefully acknowledge the support of NVIDIA Corporation with the donation
of the Titan V GPU used for this research. Y.S. is a Marylou Ingram Scholar.
arXiv:1911.05548v1  [cs.CV]  13 Nov 2019

2
J. Roels et al.
to manual segmentation or interactive approaches that rely on shallow segmen-
tation algorithms [14,3,1], which is costly or sacriﬁces performance.
This work focuses on active learning, a subdomain of machine learning that
aims to minimize supervision without sacriﬁcing predictive accuracy. This is
achieved by iteratively querying a batch of samples to a label providing oracle,
adding them to the train set and retraining the predictor. The challenge is to
come up with a smart selection criterion to query samples and maximize the
steepness of the training curve [13].
In this work, we employ state-of-the-art active learning approaches, com-
monly used for classiﬁcation, to image segmentation. Particularly, we illustrate
on three EM datasets that the amount of annotated samples can be reduced
to a few hundreds to obtain close to fully supervised performance. We start by
formally deﬁning the active learning problem in the context of image segmenta-
tion in Section 2. In Section 3, we give an overview of commonly used, recent
active learning approaches in classiﬁcation [13] and how these techniques can be
used in segmentation. This is followed by experimental results and a discussion
in Section 4. Lastly, the paper is concluded in Section 5.
2
Notations
We consider the task of image segmentation, i.e. given an N pixel image x ∈X ⊂
RN, we aim to compute a pixel-level labeling y ∈Y , where Y = {0, . . . , C −1}N
is the label space and C is the number of classes. We particularly focus on the
case of binary segmentation, i.e. C = 2. Let pj(x) = [f θ(x)]j be the probability
class distribution of pixel j of a parameterized segmentation algorithm f θ (for
example, an encoder-decoder network such as U-Net [11]).
Consider a large pool of i.i.d. sampled data points over the space Z = X ×Y
as {xi, yi}i∈[n], where [n] = {1, . . . , n}, and an initial pool of m randomly cho-
sen distinct data points indexed by S0 = {ij|ij ∈[n]}j∈[m]. An active learning
algorithm initially only has access to {xi}i∈[n] and {yi}i∈S0 and iteratively ex-
tends the currently labeled pool St by querying k samples from the unlabeled
set {xi}i∈[n]\St to an oracle. After iteration t, the predictor is retrained with
the available samples {xi}i∈[n] and labels {yi}i∈St, thereby improving the seg-
mentation quality. Note that, without loss of generalization, the active learning
approaches below are described for k = 1 as we can also query k > 1 samples for
k iterations, without retraining. The complete active learning workﬂow is shown
in Figure 1.
3
Active learning
In the following sections, we will discuss 5 well known and recent active learning
approaches for classiﬁcation: maximum entropy selection [9,10], least conﬁdence
selection [4], Bayesian active learning disagreement [7], k-means sampling [5] and
core set active learning [12]. Furthermore, we will show how these techniques can
be applied to image segmentation.

Cost-eﬃcient segmentation of EM images using active learning
3
Predictor 𝒇𝜽
Unlabeled pool 
𝑛∖𝑆𝑡
Labeled pool 𝑆𝑡
Training
Oracle
Sample selection 
criterion
Prediction
Query
Extend
Fig. 1. Iterative active learning workﬂow for segmentation. A predictor network f θ
predicts the class probability distributions of the unlabeled samples. These outputs
are used in a sample criterion to select the ‘most informative’ samples. The selected
samples are labeled by an oracle and the extended labeled pool is used to retrain the
predictor.
3.1
Maximum entropy sampling
Maximum entropy is a straightforward selection criterion that aims to select
samples for which the predictions are uncertain [9,10]. Formally speaking, we
adjust the selection criterion to a pixel-wise entropy calculation as follows:
x∗
t+1 = arg
max
x∈[n]\St −
N−1
X
j=0
C−1
X
c=0
[pj(x)]c log [pj(x)]c.
(1)
In other words, the entropy is calculated for each pixel and cumulated. Note that
a high entropy will be obtained when pj(x) =
1
C , this is exactly when there is
no real consensus on the predicted class (i.e. high uncertainty).
3.2
Least conﬁdence sampling
Similar to maximum entropy sampling, the least conﬁdence criterion selects sam-
ples for which the predictions are uncertain:
x∗
t+1 = arg
min
x∈[n]\St
N−1
X
j=0
max
c=0,...,C−1 [pj(x)]c.
(2)
As the name suggest, the least conﬁdence criterion selects the probability that
corresponds to the predicted class. Whenever this probability is small, the pre-
dictor is not conﬁdent about this decision. For image segmentation, we cumulate
the maximum probabilities to select the least conﬁdent samples.

4
J. Roels et al.
3.3
Bayesian active learning disagreement
The Bayesian active learning disagreement (BALD) approach [7] is speciﬁcally
designed for convolutional neural networks (CNNs). It makes use of Bayesian
CNNs in order to cope with the small amounts of training data that are usu-
ally available in active learning workﬂows. A Bayesian CNN assumes a prior
probability distribution placed over the model parameters θ ∼p(θ). The uncer-
tainty in the weights induces prediction uncertainty by marginalising over the
approximate posterior [7]:
[pj(x)]c ≈1
T
T −1
X
t=0
h
pj(x; ˆθt)
i
c,
(3)
where ˆθt ∼q(θ) is the dropout distribution, which approximates the prior proba-
bility distribution p. In other words, a CNN is trained with dropout and inference
is obtained by leaving dropout on. This causes uncertainty in the outcome that
can be used in existing criteria such as maximum entropy (Equation (1)).
3.4
K-means sampling
Uncertainty-based approaches typically sample close to the decision boundary
of the classiﬁer. This introduces an implicit bias that does not allow for data ex-
ploration. Most explorative approaches that aim to solve this problem transform
the input x to a more compact and eﬃcient representation z = g(x) (e.g. the
feature representation before the fully connected stage in a classiﬁcation CNN).
The representation that we used in our segmentation approach was the bottle-
neck representation in the U-Net. The k-means sampling approach in particular
then ﬁnds k clusters in this embedding using k-means clustering. The selected
samples are then the k samples in the diﬀerent clusters that are closest to the k
centroids.
3.5
Core set active learning
The core set approach [12] is a recently proposed active learning approach for
CNNs that is not based on uncertainty or exploratory sampling. Similar to k-
means, samples are selected from an embedding z = g(x) in such a way that a
model trained on the selection of samples would be competitive for the remaining
samples. Similar as before, the representation that we used in our segmentation
approach was the bottleneck representation in the U-Net. In order to obtain
such competitive samples, this approach aims to minimize the so-called core set
loss. This is the diﬀerence between average empirical loss over the set of labeled
samples (i.e. St) and the average empirical loss over the entire dataset including
unlabelled points (i.e. [n]).

Cost-eﬃcient segmentation of EM images using active learning
5
(a) EPFL
(b) VNC
(c) MiRA
Fig. 2. Learning curves for the discussed active learning approaches for the diﬀerent
datasets.
4
Experiments & discussion
Three public EM datasets where used to validate our approach:
– The EPFL dataset3 represents a 5 × 5 × 5 µm3 section taken from the CA1
hippocampus region of the brain, corresponding to a 2048 × 1536 × 1065
volume. Two 1048×786×165 subvolumes were manually labeled by experts
for mitochondria. The data was acquired by a focused ion-beam scanning
EM and the resolution of each voxel is approximately 5 × 5 × 5 nm3.
– The VNC dataset4 represents two 4.7 × 4.7 × 1 µm3 sections taken from the
Drosophila melanogaster third instar larva ventral nerve cord, corresponding
to a 1024 × 1024 × 20 volume. One stack was manually labeled by experts
for mitochondria. The data was acquired by a transmission EM and the
resolution of each voxel is approximately 4.6 × 4.6 × 45 nm3.
– The MiRA dataset5 [15] represents a 17×17×1.6 µm3 section taken from the
mouse cortex, corresponding to a 8624 × 8416 × 31 volume. The complete
3 Data available at https://cvlab.epﬂ.ch/data/data-em/
4 Data available at https://github.com/unidesigner/groundtruth-drosophila-vnc/
5 Data available at http://95.163.198.142/MiRA/mitochondria31/

6
J. Roels et al.
volume was manually labeled by experts for mitochondria. The data was
acquired by an automated tape-collecting ultramicrotome scanning EM and
the resolution of each voxel is approximately 2 × 2 × 50 nm3.
To properly validate the discussed approaches, we split the available labeled
data in a training and testing set. In the cases of a single labeled volume (VNC
and MiRA), we split these datasets halfway along the y axis. A smaller U-Net
(with 4 times less feature maps) was initially trained on m = 20 randomly
selected 128 × 128 samples in the training volume (learning rate of 1e−3 for 500
epochs). Next, we consider a pool of n = 2000 samples in the training data to be
queried. Each iteration, k = 20 samples are selected from this pool based on one
of the discussed selection criteria, and added to the labeled set St, after which
the segmentation network is ﬁnetuned (learning rate of 5e−4 for 200 epochs).
This procedure is repeated for T = 25 iterations, leading to a maximum training
set size of 500 samples. We validate the segmentation performance with the well
known Jaccard score:
J(y, ˆy) =
P
i [y · ˆy]i
P
i [y]i + P
i [ˆy]i −P
i [y · ˆy]i
(4)
This segmentation metric is also known as the intersection-over-union (IoU).
The resulting performance curves of the discussed approaches on the three
datasets are shown in Figure 2. We additionally show the performance obtained
by full supervision (i.e. all labels are available during training), which is the
maximum achievable segmentation performance. In comparison to the random
sampling baseline, we observe that the maximum entropy, least conﬁdence and
BALD approach perform signiﬁcantly better. These methods obtain about 10 to
15% performance increase for the same amount of available labels for all datasets.
The recently proposed core set approach performs similar to slightly better than
the baseline. We expect that this method can be improved by considering al-
ternative embeddings. Lastly, we see that k-means performs signiﬁcantly worse
than random sampling. Even though this could also be an embedding problem
such as with the core set approach, we think that exploratory sampling alone
will not allow the predictor to learn from challenging samples, which are usu-
ally outliers. We expect that a hybrid approach based on both exploration and
uncertainty might lead to better results, and consider this future work.
Figure 3 shows qualitative segmentation results on the EPFL dataset. In par-
ticular, we show results of the random, k-means and maximum entropy sampling
methods using 120 samples, and compare this to the fully supervised approach.
The maximum entropy sampling technique is able to improve the others by a
large margin and closes the gap towards fully supervised learning signiﬁcantly.
Lastly, we are interested in what type of samples the active learning ap-
proaches select for training. Figure 4 shows 4 samples of the VNC dataset that
correspond to the highest prioritized samples, according to the least conﬁdence
criterion, that were selected in the ﬁrst 4 iterations. The top row illustrates the
probability predictions of the network at that point in time, whereas the bot-
tom row shows the pixel-wise uncertainty of the sample (i.e. the maximum in

Cost-eﬃcient segmentation of EM images using active learning
7
(a) Input
(b) Ground truth
(c) Full supervision (0.857)
(d) Random (0.733)
(e) k-means (0.710)
(f) Maximum entropy (0.813)
Fig. 3. Segmentation results obtained from an actively learned U-Net with 120 samples
of the EPFL dataset based on random, k-means and maximum entropy sampling, and
a comparison to the fully supervised approach. Jaccard scores are indicated between
brackets.
Equation (2)). Note that the initial predictions at t = 1 are of poor quality, as
the network was only trained on 20 samples. Moreover, the uncertainty is high
in regions where the network is uncertain, but it is low in regions where the
network is wrong. The latter is a common issue in active learning and related
to the exploration vs. uncertainty trade oﬀ. However, over time, we see that the
network performance improves and more challenging samples are being queried
to the oracle.
5
Conclusion
Image segmentation is one of the most challenging computer vision tasks, par-
ticularly for biomedical data such as electron microscopy as annotations are
sparsely available. In order to be practically usable and scalable, image segmen-
tation algorithms such as U-Net need to be able to cope with smaller amounts
of annotated data. In this work, we propose to employ recent active learning
approaches to minimize annotation eﬀorts for training segmentation networks.
Speciﬁcally, several of these approaches (e.g. maximum entropy and least conﬁ-
dence sampling) obtain the same performance as the random sampling baseline,

8
J. Roels et al.
t = 1
t = 2
t = 3
t = 4
Fig. 4. Illustration of the selected samples in the VNC dataset over time in the active
learning process. The top row shows the pixel-wise prediction of the selected samples
at iterations 1 through 4. The bottom row show the pixel-wise least conﬁdence score
on the corresponding images.
but require 4 times fewer annotations. In future work, we will further minimize
labeling eﬀorts, by combining this active learning paradigm with weakly super-
vised approaches (i.e. using partially annotated data).
References
1. Arganda-Carreras,
I.,
Kaynig,
V.,
Rueden,
C.,
Eliceiri,
K.W.,
Schindelin,
J.,
Cardona,
A.,
Seung,
H.S.:
Trainable
Weka
Segmentation:
A
ma-
chine learning tool for microscopy pixel classiﬁcation. Bioinformatics (2017).
https://doi.org/10.1093/bioinformatics/btx180
2. Arganda-Carreras,
I.,
Turaga,
S.C.,
Berger,
D.R.,
Ciresan,
D.C.,
Giusti,
A.,
Gambardella,
L.M.,
Schmidhuber,
J.,
Laptev,
D.,
Dwivedi,
S.,
Buh-
mann, J.M., Liu, T., Seyedhosseini, M., Tasdizen, T., Kamentsky, L., Bur-
get,
R.,
Uher,
V.,
Tan,
X.,
Sun,
C.,
Pham,
T.D.,
Bas,
E.,
Uzunbas,
M.G.,
Cardona,
A.,
Schindelin,
J.,
Seung,
H.S.:
Crowdsourcing
the
cre-
ation of image segmentation algorithms for connectomics. Frontiers in Neu-
roanatomy 9 (2015). https://doi.org/10.3389/fnana.2015.00142, http://journal.
frontiersin.org/Article/10.3389/fnana.2015.00142/abstract
3. Belevich, I., Joensuu, M., Kumar, D., Vihinen, H., Jokitalo, E.: Microscopy Image
Browser: A Platform for Segmentation and Analysis of Multidimensional Datasets.
PLoS Biology 14(1) (2016). https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pbio.1002340
4. Blinker, K.: Incorporating Diversity in Active Learning with Support Vector Ma-
chines. In: Proceedings, Twentieth International Conference on Machine Learning
(2003)
5. Bodo, Z., Minier, Z., Csato, L.: Active Learning with Clustering. Active Learning
and Experimental Design @ AISTATS (2011)

Cost-eﬃcient segmentation of EM images using active learning
9
6. Ciresan, D.C., Giusti, A., Gambardella, M., L., Schmidhuber, J.: Deep Neural
Networks Segment Neuronal Membranes in Electron Microscopy Images. NIPS
pp. 1–9 (2012)
7. Gal, Y., Islam, R., Ghahramani, Z.: Deep Bayesian active learning with image
data. In: International Conference on Machine Learning (2017)
8. Januszewski, M., Kornfeld, J., Li, P.H., Pope, A., Blakely, T., Lindsey, L.,
Maitin-Shepard, J., Tyka, M., Denk, W., Jain, V.: High-precision automated
reconstruction of neurons with ﬂood-ﬁlling networks. Nature Methods (2018).
https://doi.org/10.1038/s41592-018-0049-4
9. Joshi, A.J., Porikli, F., Papanikolopoulos, N.: Multi-class active learning for image
classiﬁcation. In: IEEE Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition
(2009)
10. Li, X., Guo, Y.: Adaptive Active Learning for Image Classiﬁcation. In: IEEE Con-
ference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition. pp. 859–866 (2013)
11. Ronneberger, O., Fischer, P., Brox, T.: U-Net: Convolutional Networks for Biomed-
ical Image Segmentation. Medical Image Computing and Computer-Assisted In-
tervention – MICCAI 2015 pp. 234–241 (2015). https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-319-
24574-4 28
12. Sener, O., Savarese, S.: Active Learning for Convolutional Neural Networks: A
Core-Set Approach. In: International Conference on Learning Representations
(2018)
13. Settles, B.: Active Learning Literature Survey. Tech. rep., University of Wisconsin
(2010). https://doi.org/10.1.1.167.4245
14. Sommer, C., Straehle, C., Kothe, U., Hamprecht, F.A.: Ilastik: Interactive learn-
ing and segmentation toolkit. In: IEEE International Symposium on Biomedical
Imaging. pp. 230–233 (2011). https://doi.org/10.1109/ISBI.2011.5872394
15. Xiao, C., Chen, X., Li, W., Li, L., Wang, L., Xie, Q., Han, H.: Automatic Mitochon-
dria Segmentation for EM Data Using a 3D Supervised Convolutional Network.
Frontiers in Neuroanatomy (2018). https://doi.org/10.3389/fnana.2018.00092
