QMCPACK: Advances in the development, eﬃciency, and application of auxiliary
ﬁeld and real-space variational and diﬀusion Quantum Monte Carlo
P. R. C. Kent,1, a) Abdulgani Annaberdiyev,2 Anouar Benali,3 M. Chandler Bennett,4
Edgar Josu´e Landinez Borda,5 Peter Doak,6 Hongxia Hao,7 Kenneth D. Jordan,8
Jaron T. Krogel,9 Ilkka Kyl¨anp¨a¨a,10 Joonho Lee,11 Ye Luo,3 Fionn D. Malone,5 Cody
A. Melton,12 Lubos Mitas,2 Miguel A. Morales,5 Eric Neuscamman,7, 13 Fernando A.
Reboredo,9 Brenda Rubenstein,14 Kayahan Saritas,15 Shiv Upadhyay,8 Guangming
Wang,2 Shuai Zhang,16 and Luning Zhao17
1)Center for Nanophase Materials Sciences Division and Computational
Sciences and Engineering Division, Oak Ridge National Laboratory, Oak Ridge,
Tennessee 37831, USAb)
2)Department of Physics, North Carolina State University, Raleigh,
North Carolina 27695-8202, USA
3)Computational Science Division, Argonne National Laboratory,
9700 S. Cass Avenue, Lemont, IL 60439, USA
4)Materials Science and Technology Division, Oak Ridge National Laboratory,
Oak Ridge, Tennessee, 37831, USA
5)Quantum Simulations Group, Lawrence Livermore National Laboratory,
7000 East Avenue, Livermore, CA 94551, USA
6)Center for Nanophase Materials Sciences Division and Computational
Sciences and Engineering Division, Oak Ridge National Laboratory, Oak Ridge,
Tennessee 37831, USA
7)Department of Chemistry, University of California, Berkeley, California 94720,
USA
8)Department of Chemistry, University of Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania 15260,
USA
9)Materials Science and Technology Division, Oak Ridge National Laboratory,
b) Notice:
This manuscript has been authored by UT-Battelle,
LLC, under Contract No.
DE-
AC0500OR22725 with the U.S. Department of Energy. The United States Government retains and the
publisher, by accepting the article for publication, acknowledges that the United States Government re-
tains a non-exclusive, paid-up, irrevocable, world-wide license to publish or reproduce the published form
of this manuscript, or allow others to do so, for the United States Government purposes. The Department
of Energy will provide public access to these results of federally sponsored research in accordance with
the DOE Public Access Plan (http://energy.gov/downloads/doe-public-access-plan)
1
arXiv:2003.01831v2  [physics.comp-ph]  6 May 2020

Oak Ridge, Tennessee 37831, USA
10)Computational Physics Laboratory, Tampere University, P.O. Box 692,
33014 Tampere, Finland
11)Department of Chemistry, Columbia University, New York, NY 10027,
USA
12)Sandia National Laboratories, Albuquerque, New Mexico 87123,
USA
13)Chemical Sciences Division, Lawrence Berkeley National Laboratory, Berkeley,
CA, 94720, USA
14)Department of Chemistry, Brown University, Providence, RI 02912,
USA
15)Department of Applied Physics, Yale University, New Haven, CT 06520,
USA
16)Laboratory for Laser Energetics, University of Rochester, 250 E River Rd,
Rochester, NY 14623, USA
17)Department of Chemistry, University of Washington, Seattle, Washington, 98195,
USA
(Dated: 7 May 2020)
2

We review recent advances in the capabilities of the open source ab initio Quan-
tum Monte Carlo (QMC) package QMCPACK and the workﬂow tool Nexus used
for greater eﬃciency and reproducibility. The auxiliary ﬁeld QMC (AFQMC) im-
plementation has been greatly expanded to include k-point symmetries, tensor-
hypercontraction, and accelerated graphical processing unit (GPU) support. These
scaling and memory reductions greatly increase the number of orbitals that can prac-
tically be included in AFQMC calculations, increasing accuracy. Advances in real
space methods include techniques for accurate computation of band gaps and for
systematically improving the nodal surface of ground state wavefunctions. Results
of these calculations can be used to validate application of more approximate elec-
tronic structure methods including GW and density functional based techniques.
To provide an improved foundation for these calculations we utilize a new set of
correlation-consistent eﬀective core potentials (pseudopotentials) that are more ac-
curate than previous sets; these can also be applied in quantum-chemical and other
many-body applications, not only QMC. These advances increase the eﬃciency, ac-
curacy, and range of properties that can be studied in both molecules and materials
with QMC and QMCPACK.
a)kentpr@ornl.gov
3

I.
INTRODUCTION
Quantum Monte Carlo (QMC) methods are an attractive approach for accurately com-
puting and analyzing solutions of the Schr¨odinger equation.1–3 The methods form a general
ab initio methodology able to solve the quantum many-body problem, applicable to idealized
models such as chains or lattices of atoms through to complex and low-symmetry molec-
ular and condensed matter systems, whether ﬁnite or periodic, metallic or insulating, and
with weak to strong electronic correlations. Signiﬁcantly, the methods can naturally treat
systems with signiﬁcant multi-reference character, and are without electron self-interaction
error, which challenges many quantum chemical approaches and density functional theory
approximations, respectively. The methods continue to be able to take advantage of im-
provements in computational power, giving reduced time to solution with new generations
of computing. Due to these features, usage of QMC methods for ﬁrst principles and ab initio
calculations is growing.
Compared to traditional deterministic approaches, QMC methods are generally distin-
guished by: (1) use of statistical methodologies to solve the Schr¨odinger equation. This
allows the methods to not only treat problems of high-dimensionality eﬃciently, but also
potentially use basis, wave function, and integral forms that are not amenable to numerical
integration. (2) Use of few and well-identiﬁed approximations that can potentially be quan-
tiﬁed or made systematically convergeable. (3) A low power scaling with system-size, but
large computational cost prefactor. (4) High suitability to large scale parallel computing ow-
ing to lower communications requirements than conventional electronic structure methods.
Scaling has been demonstrated to millions of compute cores.4
Modern applications of QMC have expanded to cover many of the same systems studied
by density functional theory (DFT) and quantum chemical approaches, and in many cases
also at a similar atom and electron count, although at far greater computational cost. Besides
those described in below, recent molecular applications of QMC include studies of the nature
of the quadruple bond in C25, acenes6, physisorption of water on graphene7, binding of
transition metal diatomics8, and DNA stacking energies9. Materials applications include
nitrogen defects in ZnO10, excitations in Mn doped phosphors11, and the singlet-triplet
excitation in MgTi2O412. Methodological improvements include: reducing the sensitivity
of pseudopotential evaluation13, extensions to include linear response14, density functional
4

embedding15, excited states including geometry optimization16, improved twist averaging17,
and accurate trial wavefunctions via accurate densities18. Importantly, for model systems
such as the hydrogen chain, the methods can be used to benchmark themselves as well as
other many-body approaches19. This partial list of developments and applications from the
last two years alone indicates that the ﬁeld is growing and maturing.
In this article we describe recent updates to the QMCPACK code and its ecosystem
of wavefunction converters and workﬂow tools. These updates have aimed to expand the
range of systems, properties, and accuracies that can be achieved both with QMCPACK
and with QMC techniques in general. For a description of the underlying methodology we
refer the reader to Refs. 1–4, and 20. In particular, a thorough description of real space
QMC methods is given in Section 5 of Ref. 4. For an extensive introduction to AFQMC we
refer the reader to Ref.20.
QMCPACK is a fully open source and openly developed QMC package, with 48 coauthors
on the primary citation paper4 published in 2018 and an additional 5 contributors since then.
The main website for QMCPACK is https://qmcpack.org and the source code is currently
available through https://github.com/QMCPACK/qmcpack. QMCPACK aims to implement
state of the art QMC methods, be generally applicable, easy to use, and high-performing on
all modern computers. Since the publication of Ref.4, the range of QMC calculations that
are possible has been expanded by signiﬁcant enhancements to the Auxiliary-Field QMC
(AFQMC) solver. This orbitally based method is distinct from and complementary to the
longer-implemented real space methods of variational and diﬀusion QMC (VMC and DMC,
respectively). The AFQMC implementation can fully take advantage of graphics processing
units (GPUs) for a considerable speedup and, unlike the real-space methods, can also exploit
k-point symmetries. It shares the same workﬂow tool, Nexus, which helps simplify and ease
application of all the QMC methods by new users as well as aid in improving reproducibility
of complex multi-step research investigations. To our knowledge this is currently the only
AFQMC code designed for large scale research calculations that is open source. To help
guarantee the future of the code, it is undergoing rapid development and refactoring to target
the upcoming Exascale architectures as part of the U.S. Exascale Computing Project21,
which also entails major updates to the testing, validation and maintainability.
The electronic structure and quantum chemical codes that QMCPACK is interfaced to for
trial wavefunctions has been expanded to include Qbox22, PySCF23, Quantum Espresso24,
5

Quantum Package25, and GAMESS26. Additional codes such as NWCHEM27 can be inter-
faced straightforwardly.
In the following, we ﬁrst review in Section II the open development principles of QMC-
PACK. In Section III we discuss updates to the Nexus workﬂow package. This integrates
entire research electronic structure workﬂows for greater productivity and reproducibility
than by-hand invocation of individual calculations. Due to the infeasibility of performing
QMC calculations for general systems using an all electron approach, use of eﬀective core
potentials (ECPs), or pseudopotentials, is essential. To improve the accuracy obtainable
we have developed a new approach and set of “correlation consistent” ECPs. These can
be used in all ab initio calculations, not only QMC, and are described in Section IV. Ad-
vances in the AFQMC implementation are described in Section V. Turning to real-space
QMC methods in Section VI, algorithms and multiple determinant trial wavefunctions can
now be used to obtain improved ground state energies as well as band gaps in solid-state
materials. As a result, it is now possible to begin to test the accuracy of the nodal surfaces
that have long been used in these calculations. Finally, in Section VII, we give three ap-
plications: ﬁrst, application to non-valence anions, which challenge all electronic structure
and quantum chemical techniques. Second, application to excitations of localized defects
in solids VII B. Third, the ability to obtain the momentum distribution has recently been
improved, motivated by recent experiments on VO2. A summary is given in Section VIII.
II.
OPEN DEVELOPMENT AND TESTING
Fully open source development is an important core value of the QMCPACK develop-
ment team. Besides improving the quality of the software, anecdotally it also improves the
on-boarding experience for new users. While the developers of many electronic structure
packages now practice some degree of open development, QMCPACK has seen very signif-
icant beneﬁts from this in the last few years. We expect other packages would also beneﬁt
from full adoption and therefore give details here.
QMCPACK is an open source package, with releases and the latest development source
code available through https://github.com/QMCPACK/qmcpack. QMCPACK is written in
C++14, with MPI parallelization between compute nodes, OpenMP threading used for
multicore parallelism. CUDA is used for NVIDIA accelerators. Options to support CUDA,
6

complex valued wavefunctions, and to adjust the numerical precision used internally are
currently compile time options.
Besides adoption of a distributed source code control system, we have found that devel-
opment productivity can be further increased by adoption of code reviews and continuous
integration (testing). To maximize the eﬃciency of both contributors and reviewers and
shorten the development cycle of new features, work-in-progress pull requests are encour-
aged for early engagement in the process. The early review allows guidance to be given,
e.g. are the algorithms clear enough to other developers and are the coding guidelines being
followed. At the same time, continuous integration is applied to the proposed code change.
This process routinely catches cases that developers may not have considered or tested
against, e.g. the complex-valued build of QMCPACK or accelerated GPU support, that are
compile time options. This period of comment while the work is being completed also helps
advertise the work to other developers and minimizes risk of duplicated work. Our experi-
ence strongly suggests that this process reduces bugs, reduces potential developer’s eﬀort,
and saves reviewer’s time compared to a late engagement with an unexpected pull request.
All the discussions around the code change become archived searchable documentation and
potential learning materials.
Testing of QMCPACK has been signiﬁcantly expanded. Two years ago, QMCPACK had
limited unit, integration and performance testing categories: unit tests that run quickly on
individual components; integration tests that exercise entire runs; performance tests for mon-
itoring relative performance between code changes. However, due to the stochastic nature
of QMC, as the number of tests and build combinations increased it became impractical to
run the integration tests long enough to obtain a statistically reliable pass/fail: the smallest
(shortest) integration test set currently takes around one hour to execute on a 16 core ma-
chine, and must necessarily suﬀer from occasional statistical failures. Thus, a new category
of tests was needed for quickly examining full QMC execution with a reproducible Monte
Carlo trajectory. The new deterministic integration tests are modiﬁed QMC runs with only
a few steps, very few Monte Carlo walkers, and ﬁxed random seeds for absolute reproducibil-
ity. All the major features of QMCPACK are covered by this new of category tests. Running
all the unit and deterministic integration tests takes approximately one minute which is fast
enough for iterative development and fast enough to be used in continuous integration. This
fast to run set of tests facilitates signiﬁcant changes and refactoring of the application which
7

otherwise would be far more diﬃcult to test and unlikely to be attempted by non-experts
without long experience with the codebase. All the deterministic tests are accompanied
by longer running statistical tests that can be used to verify a new implementation when
changes alter a previous deterministic result. Combinations of these tests are run automat-
ically on a nightly basis and report to a public dashboard https://cdash.qmcpack.org.
At the time of writing, around 25 diﬀerent machine and build combinations are used to run
around 1000 labeled tests each, and most of these cover multiple features.
Improving source code readability is critical for both new and experienced developers. In
the past, misleading variable or class names and confusing function names have confused
developers and resulted in subtle bugs, e.g. due to similarly named functions, only one of
which updates internal state in the Monte Carlo algorithm. For this reason, coding standards
including naming conventions have been added in the manual and are enforced on newly
contributed codes. Existing codes are updated to follow the standards as they need other
modiﬁcations. Automatic source formatting is also applied with the help of the clang-format
tool. Concomitantly, both developer sections in the manual and source code documentation
are signiﬁcantly expanded.
As a result of the above changes, new contributors with a basic theoretical background
can connect source code with textbook equations with much less diﬃculty than in the past.
These eﬀorts are clearly bringing long term beneﬁt to QMCPACK and hopefully can be
transferred to other scientiﬁc applications as well.
III.
IMPROVING QMC WORKFLOWS WITH NEXUS
QMC techniques are progressing from methods under research towards more routine
application. In this transition, usability of QMC becomes an important factor. A mature,
usable computational method transfers responsibility for correct execution from users to
the code. Major factors determining overall usability include: ease of requesting a desired
result (in the form of input), robustness of the code in obtaining the desired result, and
complexity of the overall calculation process. All of these contribute to the eﬀort required
by the user to obtain desired results. In essence, higher required eﬀort translates directly
into lower productivity of the user base. Lower productivity in turn risks a lower overall
adoption rate and thus blunts overall impact of the method. It is therefore important to
8

seek to understand and minimize barriers to the practical use of QMC.
To illustrate the complexity of the QMC calculation process, we describe below a basic
but realistic sequence of calculations (a scientiﬁc workﬂow) that is required to obtain a ﬁnal
ﬁxed node DMC total energy per formula unit for a single crystalline solid with QMCPACK.
In this workﬂow, we suppose that self-consistent (SCF) and non-self-consistent (NSCF)
calculations are performed with Quantum Espresso24 and wavefunction optimization (OPT),
variational Monte Carlo (VMC), and diﬀusion Monte Carlo calculations are performed with
QMCPACK. SCF/NSCF calculations might be performed on a workstation or a few nodes
of a cluster, VMC/OPT calculations on a research-group sized cluster (∼30 nodes), and
DMC on high performance computing resources (∼1000 nodes).
1. Converge DFT orbitals with respect to plane-wave energy cutoﬀ(4–6 SCF calculations
ranging from 300 to 800 Ry for the energy cutoﬀ).
2. Converge B-spline orbital representation with respect to B-spline mesh spacing (1
NSCF, ∼5 VMC calculations in a small supercell over a series of ﬁner mesh spacings).
3. Converge twist grid density (∼5 VMC calculations in a small supercell for a series of
increasingly dense supercell Monkhorst-Pack twist grids).
4. Determine best optimization process (∼6 optimization (OPT) calculations in a small
supercell over varying input parameters and e.g. Jastrow forms).
5. Obtain ﬁxed node DMC total energy (∼3 NSCF, ∼3 OPT and ∼9 DMC calcula-
tions, 3 successively smaller timesteps for timestep extrapolation, 3 successively larger
supercells for ﬁnite size extrapolation).
This basic workﬂow process is to be compared with the much reduced complexity for
obtaining a single converged total energy for DFT, which typically requires only a single
input ﬁle and single program execution to perform a single SCF calculation for the ﬁnal
energy.
The complexity intrinsic to the basic workﬂow translates into a large degree of
eﬀort on the part of the user and limits the accessibility of the method for new users or
for experienced users pursuing ambitious projects comprised of a large number of DMC
calculations.
9

Scientiﬁc workﬂow tools make the QMC process more accessible in multiple ways: (1)
bringing the constellation of electronic structure codes needed to produce a single QMC
result under a single framework, (2) reducing the number of inputs required to request a
desired result to a single user-facing input ﬁle, (3) reducing overall complexity by abstracting
the execution process, (4) minimizing the direct eﬀort required to execute the workﬂow
process by assuming the management of simulation execution and monitoring from the user.
Workﬂow tools have been applied with signiﬁcant beneﬁt to related electronic structure
methods such as DFT28–31 and also to QMC32,33.
The Nexus workﬂow automation system34 was created to realize these advantages for users
of QMCPACK. Nexus is a Python-based, object oriented workﬂow system that can be run on
a range of target architectures. Nexus has been used successfully on simple workstations and
laptops, small group or institutional computing clusters, university level high performance
computing centers in the U.S. and internationally, and Leadership Computing Facilities
supported by the U.S. Department of Energy. Nexus has been used in a growing number of
QMC studies involving QMCPACK and its uptake by new users is high.
Nexus abstracts user’s interactions with each target simulation code that are components
of a desired simulation workﬂow. Access to each respective code is enabled through single
function calls that only require the user to specify a reduced set of important input param-
eters. Each function call resembles a small input block from a standard input ﬁle for an
electronic structure code. Taken together, a sequence of these blocks comprises a new meta-
input ﬁle that represents the data ﬂow and execution pattern of the underlying simulation
codes as a combined workﬂow.
Nexus assumes the responsibility of initiating and monitoring the progress of each sim-
ulation job in the workﬂow. Nexus generates expanded input ﬁles to each code based on
the reduced inputs provided by the user. It also generates job submission ﬁles and monitors
job execution progress via a lightweight polling mechanism. Apart from direct execution of
each workﬂow step, Nexus also automates some tasks that previously fell to users. One ex-
ample is that Nexus selects the best wavefunction produced during the non-linear statistical
optimization process employed by QMCPACK and automatically passes this wavefunction
to other calculations (such as diﬀusion Monte Carlo), which require it.
In the future, additional productivity gains might be realized with Nexus by further ab-
stracting common workﬂow patterns. For example, convergence studies for orbital param-
10

eters (k-points, mesh-factors, source DFT functional) often follow similar patterns which
could be encapsulated as simple components for users. Additionally, more of the responsi-
bility for obtaining desired results, e.g. total energies to a statistically requested tolerance,
could be handled by Nexus through algorithms that create and monitor dynamic workﬂows.
IV.
EFFECTIVE CORE POTENTIALS
A.
Introduction
All-electron (AE) QMC calculations become ineﬃcient and eventually infeasible with in-
creasing atomic number Z since the computational cost grows roughly as35,36 Z6. Since our
primary interest is in valence properties, pseudopotentials and/or eﬀective core potentials
(ECP) are commonly employed to eliminate the atomic cores leading to valence-only eﬀec-
tive Hamiltonians. Unfortunately, the existing tables and ECP generating tools have proved
to exhibit somewhat mixed ﬁdelity to the true all-electron calculations, especially in high
accuracy QMC studies. In order to overcome this limitation, we have proposed and con-
structed a new generation of valence-only Hamiltonians called correlation consistent ECPs
(ccECP)37–40. The key feature of this new set is the many-body construction of ccECPs
from the outset, in particular: (i) we have emphasized and put upfront the accuracy of
many-body valence spectra (eigenvalues and eigenstates) as a guiding principle in addition
to the well-known norm conservation/shape consistency principles; (ii) we have opted for
simplicity, transparency and eventual wide use, in addition to oﬀering several choices of
core sizes or even smoothed-out all-electron nuclear Coulomb potentials; (iii) we have used
a set of tests and benchmarks such as molecular bonds over a range of distances in order to
extensively probe for the quality and transferability of the ccECPs; (iv) we have established
reference data sets for the exact/nearly-exact atomic total energies, kinetic energies, as well
as single-reference and multi-reference ﬁxed-node DMC energies. At present, this covers
elements H-Kr with subsequent plans to ﬁll the periodic table.
B.
ccECP atomic and molecular properties.
The construction of ccECPs builds in electron correlations obtained from the accurate
coupled-cluster singles doubles with perturbative triples (CCSD(T)) method. By doing so,
11

ccECPs achieve very high accuracy and enjoy spectral properties on the valence subspace
that are in close agreement with the scalar relativistic all-electron (AE) Hamiltonian. The
agreement is often within chemical accuracy over a large range of atomic excitations and
ionizations that often spans hundreds of eV energy windows. Molecular properties such
as binding energies in multiple geometries, equilibrium bond lengths, and vibrational fre-
quencies were also considered in the development, mostly examining oxides, hydrides, and
homonuclear dimers. Especially, compressed bond length properties were given priority as
this corresponds to high-pressure applications and probes for the proper behavior of the
valence charge in the core region. These atomic and molecular tests provide a direct and
comprehensive comparison of ccECP and other core approximations such as BFD41, STU42,
eCEPP43, CRENBL44, SBKJC45, UC (uncorrelated, self-consistent, all-electron core), and
ccECP.S (optimization including only atomic spectrum). Here we illustrate some of these
results for selected cases.
Figure 1 shows the molecular binding energy discrepancies for FeH, FeO, VH, and VO
molecules relative to all-electron CCSD(T) where we observe that some previous ECPs
display signiﬁcant errors. In addition, Table I, lists a more comprehensive comparison by
tabulating the average of mean absolute deviations (MAD) of molecular binding properties
relative to all-electron CCSD(T) for all 3d transition metal (TM) molecules.
Similarly,
Figure 2a presents the MAD of a large valence spectrum for all 3d TM atoms. In both atomic
and molecular tests, we see that ccECP achieves smaller or on par average errors with regard
to the other ECPs. In addition, Fig. 1 shows these improvements to be consistent for diﬀerent
elements and varying geometries.
Hence, we believe that ccECP accomplishes the best
accuracy compromise for atomic spectral and molecular properties. Furthermore, ccECPs
are provided with smaller cores than conventionally used ones in some cases where large
errors were observed. This includes Na-Ar with [He] core and H-Be with softened/canceled
Coulomb singularity at the origin (ccECP(reg)). Selected molecular test results for these
are shown in Figure 3.
For reference, we also provide accurate total and kinetic energies for all ccECPs46 using
methods such as CCSDT(Q)/FCI (FCI, full conﬁguration interaction) with DZ-6Z extrap-
olations to estimate the complete basis set limit. This data, for instance, is useful in the
assessment of ﬁxed-node DMC biases. Figure 2b shows the summary of single-reference
(HF) ﬁxed-node DMC errors for ccECP pseudo atoms.
12

1.2
1.4
1.6
1.8
Bond Length (˚A)
−0.05
0.00
0.05
0.10
Discrepancy (eV)
UC
BFD
STU
eCEPP
ccECP.S
ccECP
(a) FeH binding curve discrepancies.
1.2
1.4
1.6
1.8
Bond Length (˚A)
−0.15
−0.10
−0.05
0.00
0.05
Discrepancy (eV)
UC
BFD
STU
eCEPP
ccECP.S
ccECP
(b) FeO binding curve discrepancies
1.2
1.4
1.6
1.8
2.0
Bond Length (˚A)
−0.050
−0.025
0.000
0.025
0.050
0.075
0.100
Discrepancy (eV)
UC
BFD
STU
eCEPP
ccECP.S
ccECP
(c) VH binding curve discrepancies
1.2
1.3
1.4
1.5
1.6
1.7
Bond Length (˚A)
0.0
0.1
0.2
0.3
Discrepancy (eV)
UC
BFD
STU
eCEPP
ccECP.S
ccECP
(d) VO binding curve discrepancies
FIG. 1: Binding energy discrepancies for (a) FeH, (b) FeO, (c) VH, and (d) VO molecules.
The binding curves are relative to scalar relativistic AE CCSD(T) binding curve. The
shaded region indicates a discrepancy of chemical accuracy in either direction. The
ccECPs are the only valence Hamiltonians that are consistently within the shaded region
of chemical accuracy including short bond lengths which are relevant for high pressures.
Reproduced from Ref. 39, with the permission of AIP Publishing.
C.
ccECP Database and Website
In order to facilitate the use ccECPs, we have provided basis sets and a variety of ECP
formats available at https://pseudopotentiallibrary.org, shown in Figure 4.
Each
ccECP is presented in a quantum chemistry format for direct use in various codes, including
13

UC
BFD
STU
eCEPP
ccECP.S
ccECP
De(eV)
0.0063(40) 0.0590(41) 0.0380(41) 0.0163(45) 0.0240(40) 0.0104(40)
re(˚A)
0.0012(13) 0.0064(13) 0.0026(13) 0.0019(15) 0.0027(13) 0.0010(13)
ωe(cm−1)
2.2(5.8)
10.4(5.9)
4.6(5.9)
3.9(6.9)
6.4(5.8)
2.9(5.8)
Ddiss(eV) 0.021(41)
0.145(41)
0.036(41)
0.032(46)
0.054(40)
0.016(41)
TABLE I: Average MADs of binding parameters for various core approximations with
respect to AE data for 3d TM hydride and oxide molecules. All parameters were obtained
using Morse potential ﬁt. The parameters shown are dissociation energy De, equilibrium
bond length re, vibrational frequency ωe and binding energy discrepancy at dissociation
bond length Ddiss. Reproduced from Ref. 39, with the permission of AIP Publishing.
Sc
Ti
V
Cr
Mn
Fe
Co
Ni
Cu
Zn
0.0
0.5
1.0
1.5
2.0
Mean Absolute Deviation (eV)
UC
BFD
STU
eCEPP
ccECP.S
ccECP
(a)
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
11
12
Number of valence electrons
0
2
4
6
8
10
12
Percentage
Be-Ne[He]
Mg-Ar[Ne]
Na-Ar[He]
Ga-Kr[[Ar]3d10]
K-Zn[Ne]
(b)
FIG. 2: (a) MADs for 3d TM benchmark states from bare [Ne] core up to low-lying neutral
excitations and the anionic state. (b) Fixed-node DMC biases (ϵ) as a percentage of the
correlation energy for ccECP pseudo atoms: 100ϵ/|Ecorr|. T-moves47 and single-reference
trial functions were used in calculations with the exception of Be, B, and C with
two-reference form to account for the signiﬁcant 2s −2p near-degeneracy. Fig. 2a
reproduced from Ref. 39, with the permission of AIP Publishing. Fig. 2b is adapted with
permission from Ref. 46. Copyright 2020 American Chemical Society.
14

1.2
1.4
1.6
1.8
Bond Length (˚A)
−0.8
−0.6
−0.4
−0.2
0.0
0.2
Discrepancy (eV)
UC
BFD
SDFSTU
eCEPP
SBKJC
CRENBL
ccECP
ccECP(reg)
(a) LiO binding curve discrepancies
1.2
1.3
1.4
1.5
1.6
Bond Length (˚A)
−1.0
−0.8
−0.6
−0.4
−0.2
0.0
0.2
Discrepancy (eV)
UC
SBKJC
BFD
TN-DF
STU
ccECP[Ne]
ccECP[He]
(b) SiO binding curve discrepancies
FIG. 3: Binding energy discrepancies for (a) LiO and (b) SiO molecules. The uncorrelated
core (UC) results, plus those for many diﬀerent eﬀective core potentials are given relative
to scalar relativistic all electron (AE) CCSD(T) binding curve. The shaded region indicates
a discrepancy of chemical accuracy in either direction. Details are given in Refs. 38 and 40.
Reproduced from Ref. 40 and Ref. 38, with the permission of AIP Publishing.
Molpro, GAMESS, NWChem, and PySCF which uses the NWChem format. We also
provide an XML format which can directly be used in QMCPACK.
In addition to the ccECPs themselves, we have also provided basis sets appropriate for
correlated calculations in each code format. Speciﬁcally, we have provided Dunning style48
correlation consistent basis sets from the DZ to 6Z, and in most cases have also provided
an augmented version. For use in solid state applications using a plane wave basis, we have
also transformed the semi-local potentials into fully nonlocal Kleinman-Bylander potentials49
using the Uniﬁed Pseudopotential Format. This allows the ccECPs to be directly used in
codes such as Quantum Espresso. A report ﬁle is included giving detailed information
about the quality of the Kleinman-Bylander version of the potential and recommended plane
wave energy cutoﬀenergies.
D.
Status and future developments
The ccECP table and construction principles aim at improved account of systematic errors
built into eﬀective valence Hamiltonians in a wide variety of correlated calculations (see
15

FIG. 4: Pseudopotential Library, https://pseudopotentiallibrary.org.
encouraging feedback so far50,51). Further eﬀort is focused on adapting ccECPs for eﬃcient
calculations with plane wave basis set (ccECPpw versions). This requires modifying the deep
potentials of the late 3d elements Fe-Zn in particular. The goal is to enable calculations with
plane wave cutoﬀs not exceeding ∼600-800 Ry. Plans for the near future involve ccECPs
for selected 4d and 5d elements that include a number of technologically important elements
and require explicit treatment of the spin-orbit interactions. Additional improvements such
as core polarization and relaxation corrections can be added per speciﬁc, application driven
needs.
Further plans include seeking feedback from the electronic structure community,
collecting the data for reference and validation as well as adjustments per need for use in a
broad variety of ab initio approaches.
V.
AUXILIARY FIELD QUANTUM MONTE CARLO
The latest version of QMCPACK oﬀers a now mature implementation of the phase-
less auxiliary-ﬁeld quantum Monte Carlo (AFQMC) method20,52 capable of simulating both
molecular53,54 and solid state systems55–57. AFQMC is usually formulated as an orbital-space
approach in which the Hamiltonian is represented in second-quantized form as
ˆH =
X
ij
hijˆc†
iˆcj + 1
2
X
ijkl
vijklˆc†
iˆc†
jˆclˆck + EII,
(1)
= ˆH1 + ˆH2 + EII,
(2)
16

where ˆc†
i and ˆci are the fermionic creation and annihilation operators, hij and vijkl are the one-
and two-electron matrix elements and EII is the ion-ion repulsion energy. Key to an eﬃcient
implementation of AFQMC is the factorization of the 4-index electron-repulsion integral
(ERI) tensor vijkl, which is essential for the Hubbard-Stratonovich (HS) transformation58,59.
QMCPACK oﬀers three factorization approaches which are appropriate in diﬀerent
settings.
The most generic approach implemented is based on the modiﬁed-Cholesky
factorization60–64 of the ERI tensor:
vijkl = V(ik),(lj) ≈
Nchol
X
n
Ln
ikL∗n
lj ,
(3)
where the sum is truncated at Nchol = xcM, xc is typically between 5 and 10, M is the
number of basis functions and we have assumed that the single-particle orbitals are in general
complex. The storage requirement is thus naively O(M 3) although sparsity can often be
exploited to keep the storage overhead manageable (see Table II). Note that QMCPACK
can accept any 3-index tensor of the form of Ln
ik so that alternative density-ﬁtting based
approaches can be used.
Although the above approach is eﬃcient for moderately sized
molecular and solid-state systems, it is typically best suited to simulating systems with
fewer than 2000 basis functions.
To reduce the memory overhead of storing the three-index tensor we recently adapted
the tensor-hypercontraction65–67 (THC) approach for use in AFQMC56. Within the THC
approach we can approximate the orbital products entering the ERIs as
ϕ∗
i (r)ϕk(r) ≈
Nµ
X
µ
ζµ(r)ϕ∗
i (rµ)ϕk(rµ),
(4)
where ϕi(r) are the one-electron orbitals and rµ are a set of specially selected interpolating
points, ζµ(r) are a set of interpolating vectors and Nµ = xµM. We can then write the ERI
tensor as a product of rank-2 tensors
vijkl ≈
X
µν
ϕ∗
i (rµ)ϕk(rµ)Mµνϕ∗
j(rν)ϕl(rν),
(5)
where
Mµν =
Z
drdr′ζµ(r)
1
|r −r′|ζ∗
ν(r′).
(6)
To determine the interpolating points and vectors we use the interpolative separable density
ﬁtting (ISDF) approach68–70. Note that the storage requirement has been reduced to O(M 2).
17

For smaller system sizes the three-index approach is preferred due to the typically larger
THC prefactors determined by xµ ≈15 for propagation and xµ ≈10 for the local energy
evaluation. The THC approach is best suited to simulating large supercells, and is also
easily ported to GPU architectures due to its smaller memory footprint and use of dense
linear algebra. Although the THC-AFQMC approach has so far only been used to simulate
periodic systems, it is also readily capable of simulating large molecular systems using the
advances from Ref. 71.
Finally, we have implemented an explicitly k-point dependent factorization for periodic
systems72
V(ikk+Qkkk),(lkljkl−Q) ≈
nQ
chol
X
n
LQkk
ik,n LQkl∗
lj,n ,
(7)
where now i runs over the number of basis functions (m) for k-point ki in the primitive cell,
Q = ki −kk + G = kl −kj + G′ is the momentum transfer vector (arising from the conser-
vation of crystal momentum) and G, G′ are reciprocal lattice vectors. Although explicitly
incorporating k-point symmetry reduces the scaling of many operations and the storage
requirement by a factor of 1/Nk (see Table. II), perhaps the most signiﬁcant advantage is
that it permits the use of batched dense linear algebra and is thus highly eﬃcient on GPU
architectures. Note that the THC and k-point symmetric factorization can be combined to
simulate larger unit cells and exploit k-point symmetry, however this has not been used to
date. We compare the three approaches in Table II and provide guidance for their best use.
In addition to state-of-the-art integral factorization techniques, QMCPACK also permits
the use of multi-determinant trial wavefunction expansions of the form
|ψT⟩=
ND
X
I
cI|DI⟩.
(8)
We allow for either orthogonal conﬁguration interaction expansions where ⟨DI|DJ⟩= δIJ and
also for non-orthogonal multi Slater determinant expansions (NOMSD) where ⟨DI|DJ⟩=
SIJ. Orthogonal expansions from complete active space self-consistent ﬁeld (CASSCF) or
selected CI methods allow for fast overlap and energy evaluation through Sherman-Morrison
based techniques, and thus do not typically incur a signiﬁcant slowdown. However, they often
require a large number of determinants to converge the phaseless error. NOMSD expansions
do not beneﬁt from fast update techniques, but often require orders of magnitude fewer
18

Method
Memory Propagation
Energy
Setting
GPU
Dense 3-index
xcM3
O(NM2)
O(xcN2M2)
M ≤1000
Yes
Sparse 3-index sxcM3
O(NM2)
O(N2M2)
M ≤2000
No
THC
x2
µM2
O(NM2)
O(x2
µNM2)
M ≤4000
No
k-point
xcm3N2
k
O(NM2)
O(xcm2n2N3
k) Nkm ≤6000 Yes
TABLE II: Comparison in the dominant scaling behavior of diﬀerent factorization
approaches implemented in QMCPACK. We have included a sparsity factor s which can
reduce the computational cost of the three-index approach signiﬁcantly. For example, in
molecular systems the memory requirement is asymptotically O(M 2) in the atomic orbital
basis, whilst for systems with translational symmetry the scaling is in principle identical to
that of the explicitly k-point dependent factorization (i.e. s ≤1/Nk) although currently
less computationally eﬃcient. We also indicate the current state of GPU support for the
diﬀerent factorizations available in QMCPACK. The THC factorization will be ported to
GPUs in the near future. Note that by using plane waves the scaling of the energy
evaluation and propagation can be brought down to O(N 2M log M) and O(NM log M)
respectively. This approach essentially removes the memory overhead associated with
storing the ERIs at the cost of using a potentially very large plane-wave basis set73,74. This
plane wave approach is not yet available in QMCPACK.
determinants than their orthogonal counterparts to achieve convergence in the AFQMC
total energy53 (see Fig. 5).
QMCPACK also permits the evaluation of expectation values of operators which do not
commute with the Hamiltonian using the back propagation method59,81,82. In particular,
the back-propagated one-particle reduced density matrix (1RDM) as well components or
contracted forms of the two-particle reduced density matrix are available. As an example
we plot in Fig. 6 the natural orbital occupation numbers computed from the back-propagated
phaseless AFQMC 1RDM.
Tools to generate the one- and two-electron integrals and trial wavefunctions for molecular
and solid state systems are also provided through the afqmctools package distributed with
QMCPACK. To date these tools are mostly dependent on the PySCF software package23,
however we provide conversion scripts for FCIDUMP formatted integrals, as well as simple
19

10−3
σE (Ha)
SHCI
NOMSD
100
101
102
103
104
Number of Determinants
-621.595
-621.593
-621.591
-621.589
Energy (Ha)
CCSDTQ
SHCI
NOMSD
FIG. 5: Comparison in the performance of selected heath-bath conﬁguration interaction
(SHCI) and NOMSD as trial wavefunctions in AFQMC calculations of NaCl in the
cc-pVDZ basis set at its equilibrium bond length. The top panel demonstrates that smaller
NOMSD expansions are necessary to reduce the standard deviation in the energy
estimator (σE) compared to SHCI trial wavefunctions. The bottom panel shows that the
total energy converges more rapidly with determinant number when using a NOMSD trial
wavefunction, where the horizontal dashed line is the coupled cluster singles, doubles,
triples and quadruples (CCSDTQ) result. The SHCI and NOMSD wavefunctions were
generated using the DICE75,76 and PHFMOL77–79 packages respectively. The CCSDTQ
result was computed using the Aquarius package80. Reproduced from Ref.53
Python routines to convert factorized integrals or trial wavefunctions provided from any
source to our internal HDF5 based ﬁle format. Detailed tutorials on how to run AFQMC in
QMCPACK are also provided. Nexus (Sec.III) can be used to drive the process of mean-ﬁeld
20

0
10
20
30
40
50
60
70
Orbital Index
0.00
0.25
0.50
0.75
1.00
1.25
1.50
1.75
2.00
Natural Orbital Occupation Number
n = 2
n = 3
n = 4
n = 5
n = 6
FIG. 6: Phaseless AFQMC natural orbital occupation numbers computed from the
back-propagated 1RDM for the n-acenes (C2H4C4nH2n) in the STO-3G basis set.
Geometries are taken from Ref. 83. Error bars are plotted but are smaller than the symbol
size.
calculation, wavefunction conversion, and AFQMC calculation. We are using this integration
to perform a study of the relative strengths of AFQMC and real space QMC methods.
Over the next year we plan to extend the list of observables available as well as complete
GPU ports for all factorization and wavefunction combinations.
In addition we plan to
implement the ﬁnite temperature AFQMC algorithm84–88, and spin-orbit Hamiltonians with
non-collinear wavefunctions. We will also release our ISDF-THC factorization tools and our
interface to Quantum Espresso24. We hope our open-source eﬀort will enable the wider use
of AFQMC in a variety of challenging settings.
VI.
TOWARDS SYSTEMATIC CONVERGENCE OF REAL-SPACE QMC
CALCULATIONS
The key factor in reaching high accuracy using QMC is the choice of trial wave function
ΨT. For all-electron DMC calculations the nodes of the wavefunction are the only factor
21

in determining the error in the computed energy, while the bulk of the wavefunction aﬀects
the statistical eﬃciency and timestep error of the calculation. For calculations involving
pseudopotentials, high accuracy of the trial wavefunction is also needed around the atomic
cores to minimize the approximations in evaluating the non-local energy. Single Slater de-
terminant (SD) wavefunctions built with Hartree-Fock or Kohn-Sham orbitals supplemented
by a Jastrow correlation factor generally give good results, e.g. Ref. 89, and are used almost
exclusively today in solid-state calculations.
Reaching systematic convergence of the trial wavefunction and its nodal surface for gen-
eral systems has been a key challenge for real space QMC methods since their invention.
Besides increasing accuracy in calculated properties, this is also required to remove the start-
ing point dependence and allow use of QMC where all potential sources of trial wavefunction
are unreliable. In 2008 this was performed for ﬁrst row atoms and diatomic molecules Ref.90,
and improved algorithms are aiding calculations on larger systems91. For general systems
with many electrons, the overall challenge remains. Furthermore, if the wavefunction is to
be used in DMC, commonly used optimization techniques only optimize the nodal surface
indirectly by improving the VMC energy and/or variance. Minimization of the objective
function is therefore not guaranteed to minimize the ﬁxed-node energy. Consistently high
accuracy wavefunctions are also needed around atomic cores to minimize the locality error
in pseudopotential evaluation, posing a challenge for trial wavefunction optimization with a
large number of coeﬃcients.
One possible step along the way would be to optimize all the orbital coeﬃcients in a
single determinant wavefunction, but due to the limited ﬂexibility in describing the (3N −1)
dimensional nodal surface this protocol can not give exact nodes for general systems. This
approach could represent a useful starting point independent step, while keeping a simple
form for the trial wavefunction. Other possibilities for improving the trial wavefunction
while retaining simplicity include techniques such as backﬂow and iterative backﬂow92,93,
and antisymmetrized geminal product wavefunctions (e.g. Ref. 94). However, more ﬂexible
and complex trial wavefunctions are required to achieve systematic convergence of the nodal
surface and to approach exact results for general systems.
The most straightforward method to improve the quality of the trial wavefunction nodes
in a convergeable manner is to increase its complexity via a multi-Slater determinant (MSD)
or conﬁguration-interaction (CI) expansion:
22

ΨT =
M
X
i=1
ciD↑
i D↓
i eJ
(9)
where ΨT is expanded in a weighted (ci) sum of products of up and down spin deter-
minants Di, and J is the Jastrow correlation factor. In the limit of a full conﬁguration
interaction calculation in a suﬃciently large and complete basis set, this wavefunction is
able to represent the exact wavefunction. However, direct application of conﬁguration inter-
action is prohibitively costly for all but the smallest systems, because very large numbers of
determinants are usually required. To speed application, an eﬃcient selection procedure for
the determinants is needed. This can be combined with eﬃcient algorithms for evaluating
the wavefunction in QMC.95–97
A.
Ground state calculations
Multiple variants of selected Conﬁguration Interaction (sCI) methods have recently
demonstrated signiﬁcant success at reaching high accuracy for ground state and excited
states of molecular systems with tractable computational cost.
Within the class of sCI
methods, the CIPSI98 method has proven to be practical in providing high accuracy wave-
functions for QMC for both molecular systems and for solids99–105. sCI methods enable
unbiased construction of the trial wavefunction using only a single threshold parameter and
therefore avoid the complexities of, for example, CASSCF techniques which require expert
selection of the active space. CIPSI algorithms are implemented in the Quantum Package
2.0 code25 and fully interfaced with QMCPACK and Nexus.
For systems where CIPSI can be fully converged to the FCI limit and reliably extrapolated
to the basis set limit, QMC is not required, but for any reasonable number of electrons,
QMC can be used to further improve the convergence. The wavefunctions produced from
CIPSI can be used either directly, in which case the nodal error is determined by the CIPSI
procedure, or used to provide an initial selection of determinants whose coeﬃcients are
subsequently reoptimized in presence of a Jastrow function, or used within DMC where the
projection procedure will improve on the CIPSI wavefunction. This procedure is equally
applicable to solids as well as molecules, provided k-points and their symmetries are fully
implemented.
23

In the following, we illustrate these techniques by application to molecular and solid-state
lithium ﬂuoride. In both cases, we use Linear Combination of Atomic Orbitals (LCAO) and
diﬀerent Gaussian basis set sizes to generate the trial wavefunctions. CIPSI energies refer
to the variational energy corrected with the sum of energies from second order perturbation
theory (PT2) of each determinant, i.e. E+PT2 , at convergence in energy with the number of
determinants. Since the sizes of both systems are small enough to reach CIPSI convergence
with, for the largest case, less than 5M determinants, for the DMC calculations, the coeﬃ-
cients of the determinants are not reoptimized in presence of a Jastrow function. The cost of
DMC with a CIPSI trial wavefunction scales as
p
(N)∗(V arRatio)2 where N is the number of
determinants in the expansion and V arRatio is the ratio between the variance of a system at
1 determinant and the same system at N determinants (V arRatio = V arNdets
V ar1det ). In the case of
the molecular systems, V arRatio varies between 0.7 (for cc-pcVDZ and N = 1.6M) and 0.8
(cc-pcVQZ and N = 5.2M) or an increase of cost ranging from 620 and 1500 times the cost
of a single determinant DMC run. In the case of the solid, V arRatio varies between 0.83 (for
cc-pVDZ and N = 700k) and 0.56 (cc-pcVQZ and N = 9M) or an increase of cost ranging
from 570 and 940 times the cost of a single determinant DMC run. The main diﬀerence
in the change of cost between the molecular system and solid system is the use of ECPs,
reducing signiﬁcantly the variance of the calculations for both DMC(SD) and DMC(CIPSI)
B.
Molecular Lithium Fluoride
Lithium Fluoride is a small molecule for which the multi-determinant expansion and
therefore trial wavefunction can be fully converged to the FCI limit using the CIPSI method.
Moreover, CCSD(T) calculations of the Vertical Ionization Potential (VIP) are feasible and
it’s experimental value is known106, providing reliable reference data. Care has to be taken
in the comparison to experimental values, as experimental measurements include intrinsic
uncertainties and environmental parameters such as temperature. These eﬀects, including
zero-point motion, are not included in our study and might explain the remaining dis-
crepancies between our calculations and the experimental ionization energy value given by
Berkowitz et al. Berkowitz, Tasman, and Chupka 106
While the total energies at each basis set of ground state calculations and cation calcula-
tions are diﬀerent, their trends are identical and we therefore only show ﬁgures representing
24

the ground state. Figure-7 shows the ground state DMC total energies of LiF, computed
using various trial wavefunctions; single-determinant such as Hartree-Fock (HF), DFT’s
PBE0 and B3LYP hybrid functionals and multi-determinant using the converged CIPSI
trial wavefunction. CCSD(T) and CIPSI energies are added to the ﬁgure for reference and
all calculations are performed for 3 basis-sets increasing in size (cc-pCVNZ, N=D,T,Q) and
extrapolated to the complete basis-set limit (CBS). The trends of CCSD(T) and CIPSI total
energies are in agreement with each other to the CBS limit. CIPSI calculations recover more
correlation energy ∼0.24eV for the ground state and ∼0.13 eV for the cation. This is to be
expected as CCSD(T) includes singles, doubles and perturbative triples excitations while
CIPSI wavefunction includes up to 9th order excitations with more than 70% describing
quadruple excitations (10% describing higher order excitations) for both ground and cation
states. Interestingly, at the CBS limit, CIPSI total energy converges to the same limit as
the DMC(CIPSI) energy while the CCSD(T) converges to the same energy as the SD-DMC
energies.
FIG. 7: Ground state total energies (eV) of molecular LiF for DMC(HF), DMC(B3LYP),
DMC(PBE0), DMC(CIPSI) CCSD(T) and converged CIPSI using cc-pCVNZ basis sets
where N=D,T,Q and extrapolate to the CBS limit. All single-determinant DMC curves are
on top of each other.
25

At the DMC level of theory, the dependence on basis-set is rather weak; less than ∼10 meV
in the worst case. In the LiF molecular case, the nodal surface of all tested single-determinant
trial wavefunction are within error bars of each other, meaning they are essentially the
same. Such weak dependence on the starting method and on the basis set are a a signiﬁcant
advantage and strength of the method when compared to other methods such as sCI or
even AFQMC. The use of CIPSI-based trial wavefunctions in DMC allows the recovery
of 0.24eV for the ground state and 0.5eV for the cation. This diﬀerence underlines the
diﬀerent sensitivity of the nodal surface to excited and charged states. The vertical ionization
potential (VIP), EV IP = Ecation−Eground, DMC performed using CIPSI wavefunctions shows
almost no dependency to the basis set size, Fig. 8 while DMC(CIPSI), CIPSI and CCSD(T)
are in perfect agreement at the CBS limit, demonstrating good error compensation for the
latter method.
FIG. 8: Vertical ionization potential of LiF using diﬀerent methods and trial
wavefunctions. The dashed line corresponds experiment.106
26

C.
Solid-state Lithium Fluoride
Solid LiF is a face centered cubic material with a large gap, used mainly in electrolysis for
his role in facilitating the formation of an Li-C-F interface on the carbon electrodes107. The
purpose of this example is to demonstrate basis set eﬀect and the systematic convergence of
DMC energy with the number of determinants (a paper demonstrating convergence to the
thermodynamic limit is in preparation). We simulated a cell of (LiF)2 (4 atoms per cell)
at the Gamma point using correlation consistent electron-core potentials (ccECP)Bennett
et al. 37, Wang et al. 40 described in Sec-IV and the cc-pVDZ, cc-pVTZ and cc-pVQZ basis
set associated with the ccECPs. PySCF, Quantum Package and QMCPACK are able to
simulate all shapes of cells with both real and complex wavefunctions, corresponding to any
possible k-point. In this case, running at Gamma point is simply for convenience.
For such a small simulation cell, it is possible to convergence the sCI wavefunction to the
FCI limit with a reasonable number of determinants, as can be seen in Fig-9. The number
of determinants needed to reach approximate convergence remains important: around 700K
in cc-pVDZ, 6M in cc-pVTZ and 9M in cc-pVQZ. Similarly to the molecular case, in the
converged energies for the cc-pVTZ and cc-pVQZ basis sets are in agreement, indicating
that the basis set is suﬃciently convergence. Interestingly, in the cc-pVTZ case the DMC
energy converges signiﬁcantly faster with the number of determinants (700K instead of
6M). The slower convergence of the cc-pVQZ curve indicates that important determinants
describing relevant static correlations are introduced late in the selection process. Using
natural orbitals or in general, an improved choice of orbitals or selection scheme could
accelerate the convergence.
D.
Solid-state band gap calculations
The band gap of a solid is a critical and fundamental property of a material to predict
accurately. QMC calculations for solids have traditionally used completely independent cal-
culations for ground and excited states and single determinant calculations. This approach
can be accurate but it relies on good error cancelation between the calculated total energy
for each state, making the selection of consistently accurate trial wavefunctions critical. Im-
proved methods are needed to enforce good error cancelation including approaches that can
27

-868.00
-867.95
-867.90
-867.85
-867.80
-867.75
-867.70
1e+04
1e+05
1e+06
1e+07
DMC Energy (eV)
Number of Determinants
cc-pVDZ
cc-pVTZ
cc-pVQZ
FIG. 9: Convergence of DMC energies of solid LiF using for diﬀerent basis sets with
respect to the number of determinants.
be systematically converged to give in-principle exact results.
As discussed above, convergent wavefunctions and energies can be constructed using sCI
techniques. However, even for small primitive cells with relatively uncorrelated electronic
structures, this approach quickly requires millions of determinants making it expensive to
apply today.
We have developed theories, methods and implementations to obtain the
band-edge wavefunctions around the fundamental gap and their relative energies eﬃciently
and to a high accuracy. Error cancelation is built into the methodology so that simpler
trial wavefunctions are eﬀective and the scheme is substantially more eﬃcient to apply.
Surprisingly, for the systems examined so far, only single and double excitations need be
considered to obtain accurate band gaps, even using the simple VMC method. This makes
the technique comparatively cheap to apply.
To compute the optical band gaps of insulators and semi-conductors we use the energy
diﬀerence of optimized wave functions that describe the valence band maximum (VBM) and
the conduction band minimum (CBM). Optimizations use the recently developed excited
28

state variational principle,108–110
Ω(ω, Ψ) =
⟨Ψ|ω −H|Ψ⟩

Ψ|(ω −H)2|Ψ
 =
ω −E
(ω −E)2 + σ2
(10)
whose global minimum is not the ground state but the eigenstate with energy immediately
above the chosen value ω, which could be placed within the band gap to target the ﬁrst
excited state and thus predict the optical gap.
QMCPACK evaluates Ωvia variational
Monte Carlo (VMC) method to avoid explicit dealing with the H2 term, and minimizes it
using the linear method. For ground state, we include the closed-shell determinant built
from Kohn-Sham (KS) orbitals, plus all single-particle-hole excitations, which represents
the leading-order terms of orbital rotation that transforms KS orbitals to the ones that
minimizes Ωin the presence of the Jastrow factor. For the excited state, we include all
the single-particle-hole excitations as in Bethe-Salpeter equation (BSE)111 methods as well
as selected double excitations to capture the re-polarization of the electron cloud in the
vicinity of the exciton. We use the variance of the wavefunctions as a proxy for accuracy,
and by varying the number of determinants choose ground and excited states with consistent
variance.
We have used this approach in Ref. 112 to study optical gaps of a variety of solids
ranging from small-gap semi-conductors to large gap insulators and compare our results to
the commonly used GW approach based on many-body perturbation theory (MBPT). As
detailed in the supplemental information of Ref. 112 the band gaps were extrapolated using
calculations on 8, 16 and 24 atom supercells. Figure 10 shows that the predicted optical
gaps are in excellent agreements with experimental values and the mean absolute deviation
(MAD) is just 3.5%, compared to MADs more than twice this large for the optical gaps
obtained by subtracting the known exciton binding energy from G0W0 and self-consistent
GW gaps. These calculations were able to run of departmental level computing and did
not require supercomputers due to the use of VMC and moderate sized supercells utilized.
Remaining errors that have yet to be investigated include the size of the CI expansion and
the limited correlation energy obtained with VMC, the pseudopotentials, and residual ﬁnite
size error. DMC may further improve the VMC results.
In order to further show the method’s advantage, we performed a thorough analysis of
zinc oxide, a material that is particularly challenging for MBPT.115 As shown in Figure 10,
the perturbative nature of G0W0 makes its prediction highly sensitive to the amount of
29

FIG. 10: Left: VMC optical gap predictions plotted against experimental results. The
VMC wavefunctions are constructed via a conﬁguration interaction singles doubles
expansion (VMC-CISD) or with single determinants (VMC-SD). Right: Comparison of
optical gap of ZnO between G0W0 using one-particle starting points that employ diﬀerent
fractions of exact exchange with VMC results based on the same starting points. VMC
data from Zhao,112 G0W0 results are from Fuchs113 and experimental data is from Lauck.114
exact exchange included in the DFT reference. As G0W0 assumes a zeroth-order picture,
in which electronic excitations are simple particle-hole transitions between the one-particle
eigenstates of DFT, such a sensitivity indicates the break down of this assumption and
then G0W0 becomes unreliable. On the other hand, our VMC approach is designed to be
insensitive to the DFT choice for two reasons: (1) its ability to include approximate orbital
relaxation counteracts the shortcomings of the DFT orbitals. (2) unlike G0W0 it does not
require orbital energies as input. From Figure 10 we do ﬁnd that its prediction to optical
gap is both accurate and independent to the choice of DFT functionals.
30

E.
Summary
Using DMC as a post-sCI method is very promising to systematically improve molecular
and solid-state calculations beyond the single-determinant picture. It converges faster the
sCI methods used on their own. From a practical perspective, PySCF, Quantum Package
and QMCPACK are fully interfaced with each other through the Nexus workﬂow automation
system. The necessary multi-step workﬂow to run the above examples is fully implemented.
In the case of solids, Nexus can automatically manage ﬁnite-size scaling calculations by
setting the size of the super-cells, the number of twists angles, and drive PySCF, Quantum
Package, and QMCPACK appropriately and automatically.
VII.
APPLICATIONS
To illustrate the application of recent developments in QMCPACK, in Section VII A we
give an example of using real space QMC to study non-valence anions, which are particularly
challenging systems. Section VII B gives an example of computing the excited states of
localized defects, which is a challenge for all electronic structure methods. In Section VII C
we give an example of computing the momentum-distribution and Compton proﬁle from
real space methods. The necessary estimators have recently been speciﬁcally optimized for
these tasks.
A.
Applications of DMC to Non-valence Anions
In addition to valence anions, molecules and clusters can posses non-valence anions in
which the binding of the excess electron is dominated by a combination of long-range elec-
trostatics and long-range dispersion-type correlation eﬀects. The best known class of non-
valence anions are dipole-bound anions, in which the binding of the excess electron is driven
by the dipole ﬁeld of the neutral.116–121 Non-valence anions, regardless of the nature of the
long-range interaction responsible for the electron binding, are challenging to treat using
traditional electronic structure methods due to the large, highly diﬀuse basis sets required.
Both DMC and AFQMC methods have been demonstrated to be useful in characterizing
dipole-bound anions.122,123 Non-valence anions in which electron correlation eﬀects domi-
nate the binding of the excess electron pose an additional challenge, namely, by deﬁnition,
31

they do not bind the excess electron in the Hartree-Fock (HF) approximation. In fact, HF
calculations on such excess electron systems collapse on to the neutral molecule leaving the
excess electron in a discretized continuum orbital.124 Hence, methods that start from the
HF wave function, e.g., MP2 and CCSD(T),125 also fail to bind the excess electron. Many-
body methods such as equation-of-motion coupled cluster (EOM-CC),126–129 have proven
successful in treating these species, but still face the problem of requiring very large basis
sets.
This raises the question of whether DMC calculations using a single Slater determi-
nant trial wave function to deﬁne the nodal surface can accurately describe non-valence
correlation-bound (NVCB) anions. To investigate this, we have undertaken DMC calcula-
tions on a (H2O)4 model with the monomers arranged so that the net dipole is zero.124 This
model has been studied previously using EOM-CC methods. In the present work, we focus
on a geometry at which the excess electron does not bind in the HF approximation, but for
which EOM-EA-CCSDT129 calculations using the aug-cc-pVDZ basis set130,131 augmented
with a 7s7p set of diﬀuse functions located at the center of the molecular cluster give an
electron binding energy (EBE) of 174 meV.124
For the QMC calculations, Slater-Jastrow trial wave functions that are products of a single
Slater determinant comprised of HF or DFT orbitals and a Jastrow factor were employed.
All calculations were carried out using the ccECP pseudopotentials with the corresponding
aug-cc-pVDZ type basis sets37,39 augmented with the same 7s7p set of diﬀuse functions
as employed in ref 124. The DMC calculations were carried out at three imaginary time
steps (0.001 Ha−1, 0.003 Ha−1, 0.005 Ha−1), and a linear extrapolation was performed to
obtain the zero time step limit. HF calculations with this basis set fail to bind the excess
electron, and a plot (see Fig. 11) of the singly occupied orbital of the excess electron system
reveals that it is very diﬀuse because it has collapsed onto the lowest “continuum” solution
as described by the discrete basis set. The QMC calculations were carried out with the
QMCPACK code.
The Jastrow factors used in the trial wave functions included electron-electron, electron-
nuclei, and electron-electron-nuclei terms. Normally, one would optimize the parameters in
the Jastrow factors separately for the neutral and for the anion. However, this approach
would not give meaningful results for an unbound anion, and, as a result, we adopted
the strategy of using the Jastrow factor optimized for the neutral in the subsequent DMC
32

FIG. 11: The singly occupied orbital from (left) HF and (right) B3LYP calculations on
the anion of the (H2O)4 cluster model. These were carried out using the ccECP and the
corresponding aug-cc-pVDZ basis set, augmented with a set of 7s7p diﬀuse functions
centered at the origin. The bounding box is 100 a.u. on each side, and the isosurface value
is set to 0.0005 to enable comparison between the images. The highly diﬀuse orbital from
the HF calculation is actually describing an approximation to a continuum function in the
ﬁnite Gaussian basis rather than the orbital appropriate for the anion.
calculations of the anion. The DMC calculations using trial wave functions determined in
this manner give an EBE of 183±10 meV, in good agreement with the previous EOM-EA-
CCSDT result (174 meV).124 This demonstrates that DMC calculations can recover from
the use of a trial wave function for the anion that has collapsed onto a discretized continuum
solution.
Even so, there remains the question of whether the EBE obtained from DMC calculations
that use an unphysical (i.e., collapsed onto the continuum) trial wave function could incur
an appreciable error due to an inadequate description of the nodal surface of the anion. To
address this question, we also carried out VMC and DMC calculations on the neutral and
anion of the (H2O)4 cluster model using orbitals from B3LYP132–134 calculations employing
the same pseudopotential and basis sets as used for the HF calculations.
The anion is
bound by 395 meV in the B3LYP calculations, and the singly occupied orbital of the excess
33

electron system, while still diﬀuse, is localized much closer to the molecule than in the
HF calculations. A comparison of the charge distributions of the singly occupied orbitals
from the HF and DFT calculations (see Fig. 11) shows that the DFT charge distribution is
much less spatially extended. Moreover, it more closely resembles the charge distribution
of the relevant natural orbital from the EOM calculation of Ref. 124. (The over-binding
of the anion in the B3LYP calculations is likely due to the ﬁnite extent of the integration
grid.) The DMC calculations using trial wave functions derived from B3LYP orbitals give
an EBE of 212±11 meV, ∼29 meV larger than the DMC result obtained using HF orbitals.
This increase indicates that employing a trial wave function with a more physical charge
distribution for the singly occupied orbital of the anion does have an impact on the nodal
surface for the exchange of the electrons.
The EOM-EA-CCSDT result obtained using
the aug-cc-pVDZ+7s7p basis set is 38meV smaller than the DMC EBE obtained using the
trial wave function employing B3LYP orbitals.
This suggests that the EBE from EOM
calculations may not be fully converged in these large basis sets.
Overall, these results
demonstrate that DMC is a viable approach for the characterization of NVCB anions.
B.
Excitation energies of localized defects
For defects and interfaces, most ab-initio methods can only achieve qualitative agreement
on the optical properties. We have recently studied emission energies of Mn4+-doped solids
using DMC, which is chosen as proof of principle11. We show that our approach is applicable
to similar systems, provided that the excitation is suﬃciently localized. In support of this
work, Nexus scripts and new tutorials on excited state calculations were developed that can
be applied to any gapped system (Lab 5 in the QMCPACK manual).
Multivalent ionic defects, such as Mn4+, can create multiple localized electronic states
that are trapped within the band gap of wide gap materials. Thus, luminescent centers
are created in the dopant sites through radiative recombination. Mn4+ has d3 electronic
conﬁguration all on the t2g orbitals. The ground state is in t↑↑↑
2g (4A2g) conﬁguration due to
Hund’s rules, but the excited state is found to be as t↑↑↓
2g (2Eg)135. Therefore, the emission
energy is simply deﬁned as Eem = E(2Eg) −E(4A2g).
Fig. 12(a) shows that DMC can reproduce experimental emission energies of Mn4+ doped
insulating host compounds136–138. DFT+U and hybrid-DFT, however, substantially under-
34

0
1
2
3
4
r(˚A)
0.00
0.06
0.12
0.18
0.24
n(r) in (Ne)
r(Mn-O)1
r(Mn-O)2
(b)
LDA+U
DMC
0.0
0.5
1.0
1.5
2.0
r(˚A)
0.0
0.5
1.0
g(r) in (Ne/˚A3)
Al2O3
MgO
Y2O3
K2SiF6
1.0
1.2
1.4
1.6
1.8
2.0
2.2
Emisssion Energy (eV)
(a)
DMC
Exp
LDA+U
PBE
PBE+U
HSE
FIG. 12: (a) Emission energies of Mn4+ doped host compounds (on x-axis). (b) Number
of electrons per radial volume, n(r), around the Mn atom. The inset shows the radial
distribution function g(r) for the same density. Number of electrons per radial volume and
the radial distribution functions are related as n(r) = g(r)4πr2dr. Reproduced from Ref.
11.
estimate. Relative quantitative success of HSE with respect to PBE (or DFT+U) indicates
that emission energies might be reproduced with a larger portion of exact exchange. How-
ever, this would worsen the accuracy of the computed band gaps in the host compounds11.
In Fig. 12(b), we show the spin ﬂipped electrons per radial volume n(r) = ρ↑
ground −ρ↑
excited
which is spherically integrated around the Mn4+ atom. n(r) approaches to zero with increas-
ing radius indicating that excited electron density is strongly localized on the impurity atom.
DMC and LDA+U n(r) densities are almost identical to each other despite the large diﬀer-
ence in their emission energies which underscore the diﬃculties that needed to be overcome
for better DFT functionals139.
C.
Calculation of the many-body properties: the momentum distribution
As full-many body methods, QMC can be used to calculate many-body properties that
can not be readily obtained from single-particle or mean-ﬁeld techniques. We have recently
updated and optimized calculation of the momentum distribution.
Experimentally the momentum distribution function (MDF) can be accessed, e.g., via
angle-resolved photoemission spectroscopy and scattering methods such as Compton scat-
35

tering, positron annihilation, the (e, 2e) process, and high energy electron scattering140–143.
In general, the diﬀerential cross sections of the scattering can be related to the momentum
distribution. These experimental techniques are powerful probes for understanding subtle
details in the ground state properties of materials, which are manifested in the MDF.
In normal Fermi liquids, the electron MDF has a discontinuity at the Fermi momentum
pF. In three-dimensional systems this discontinuity deﬁnes the shape of the Fermi surface,
which is also related to the screening properties of the electrons144. The Fermi surface can
be extracted from the p-space MDF via back-folding145. This leads to occupation density
within the ﬁrst Brillouin zone from which the Fermi surface topology can be considered146.
The magnitude of the discontinuity at the Fermi surface, however, quantiﬁes the strength
of a quasiparticle excitation and is generally referred to as the renormalization factor147,148.
For strongly coupled systems the renormalization factor tends to zero as the coupling
strength increases, and thus, it provides an estimate for the strength of electron correla-
tions. Interestingly, the discontinuity at the Fermi momentum disappears for superﬂuids or
superconducting materials. For insulators the discontinuity is absent and the sharp drop is
noticeably broadened, which also holds true for some semi-metals149,150. Even small scale
charge density oscillations lead to clear signatures in the MDF151. Therefore, the momentum
distribution function provides complementary and informative knowledge to other charac-
terizations of many-body systems.
The MDF, n(p), is obtained by taking the Fourier transform of the one-body density
matrix:
n(p) = Ne
Ω
Z
dRdr′
1 ei(r1−r′
1)·pρ(r1, . . . , rNe, r′
1, . . . , rNe) = Ne
Ω
Z
ds e−ip·sn(s),
where Ωis the volume containing Ne electrons, R = {r1, . . . , rNe}, s = r′
1 −r1, and
n(s) =
Z
dR ρ(r1, . . . , rNe, r1 + s, . . . , rNe).
In variational Monte Carlo this is expressed as
n(s) =
Z
dR Ψ∗(r1, . . . , rNe)Ψ(r1 + s, . . . , rNe) =
Z
dR |Ψ(R)|2Ψ(R′)
Ψ(R) ,
where R′ = {r1 + s, . . . , rNe}. Thus, we get for the MDF:
n(p) =
Z
dR |Ψ(R)|2Ne
Ω
Z
dsΨ(R′)
Ψ(R) e−ip·s.
36

In practice, the Monte Carlo estimate for the MDF with Ns samples is given by
n(p) =
*
1
ΩNs
Ns
X
i=1
Ne
X
j=1
Ψ(R + si
j)
Ψ(R)
e−ip·si
j
+
|Ψ(R)|2
,
(11)
where R includes the coordinates of all the electrons, and si
j is a displacement vector acting
on the jth electron of the ith sample. In diﬀusion Monte Carlo calculations the mixed dis-
tribution replaces |Ψ(R)|2 , and additional measures must be taken to calculate or estimate
the density matrix. Notice that the momentum distribution normalizes to the number of
electrons
X
p
n(p) = Ne =
Ω
(2π)d
Z
dp n(p),
(12)
in which d refers to dimensionality. In Eq. (12) a ﬁnite system and a system at the thermo-
dynamic limit are described by summation and integration, respectively.
The MDF estimator is a one-body density matrix based estimator with very high compu-
tational cost resulting from the large number of wavefunction evaluations required. A naive
implementation can easily double the cost of a QMC calculation. Thus, eﬃcient algorithm
and implementations are critical, and similar techniques can be used for related estimators.
In Eq. (11), the computation of wavefunction ratios
Ψ(R+si
j)
Ψ(R)
and phase factor e−ip·si
j are
both expensive. Direct NeNs times of calculation is easy to implement but has a lot of
repeated eﬀort. In the
Ψ(R+si
j)
Ψ(R)
term, the evaluation of single particle orbitals at rj + si
j
dominates the cost. In fact, its call count can be reduced from NsNe to Ns by making
si
j = r′
i −rj
(13)
where r′
i is the electron coordinates of sample i. Although the leading cost of
Ψ(R+si
j)
Ψ(R)
is
optimized away, its remaining terms still scale as O(NsN 2
e ) and the computational cost
should be comparable to the non-local pseudopotential calculation.
Unlike the wavefunction ratios which needs to be computed only once for all the p, phase
factors are computed for each p and also take signiﬁcant portion of time. Similarly, for each
p, the number of evaluations can be reduced to Ns + Ne times by separating indices i and j
in two terms like Eq. (13). The calculation of e−ip·r′
i and e−ip·rj can be eﬃciently vectorized
using the single instruction multiple data (SIMD) unit in modern processors.
37

FIG. 13: QMCPACK result for the diﬀerence in the momentum distribution of VO2 across
the metal-insulator phase transition based on Ref. 151. (a) and (b) show two planes of the
3D diﬀerence proﬁle. In (c) the diﬀerences are given in four diﬀerent directions and also for
the angular averaged MDF. For more details, see Ref. 151.
By applying the above techniques and ensuring vectorization of all operations, the over-
head for evaluating the MDF in a 48 atom cell VO2 was reduced from additional 150% to
only 50% cost increase compared to a DMC run without any estimators.
Within the so-called impulse approximation (IA) the Compton proﬁle as well as the
dynamical structure factor are proportional to the projection of n(p) onto a scattering
vector149,152. In this case directional Compton proﬁle in z-direction would be expressed as
J(q) =
Ω
(2π)3
ZZ
n(px, py, pz = q)dpxdpy.
The IA is especially appropriate for X-ray Compton scattering from electronic systems142,149,
and thus, it is capable of providing a unique perspective for understanding the electronic
structure of materials; bulk properties, in particular.
In Ref. 151 QMCPACK was used in obtaining the MDFs and Compton proﬁles for VO2
across its metal insulator transition from metallic rutile (R) phase to insulating monoclinic
(M1) phase. There the analysis of the MDF shows signatures of the non-Fermi liquid char-
acter of the metallic phase of vanadium dioxide.
Moreover, ﬁndings therein provide an
explanation for the experimentally observed anomalously low electronic thermal conductiv-
ity153, which manifests as back scattering characteristics within the momentum distribution
function. Fig. 13 shows some examples of MDF diﬀerences across the phase transition in
two planes as well as for a few diﬀerent directions151.
38

VIII.
SUMMARY
We have described recent enhancements to the open source QMCPACK package. Be-
sides increases in capability for both real space and auxiliary ﬁeld Quantum Monte Carlo
(QMC) methods, the surrounding ecosystem has also been improved. These enhancements
include the workﬂow system Nexus, which aims to reduce the complexity of performing
research studies and the tens to hundreds of individual calculations that might be en-
tailed. A new set and open database of eﬀective core potentials has also been established
at https://pseudopotentiallibrary.org, and we expect that these will be of interest
for other quantum chemical and many-body calculations due to their increased accuracy,
including for stretched bonds and excited states. We have also described how improvements
in open software development have beneﬁtted the project. Besides the activities described
in this article, we note that there is substantial ongoing work to enhance the architecture
of QMCPACK for GPU accelerated machines and to obtain portable performance from a
single code base. Once the new design is proven on diverse GPUs it will be described in a
future article.
Overall the applicability of QMC continues to expand, it is becoming easier to apply, and
there are many systems and phenomena where the higher accuracy and many-body nature
of QMC is both warranted and can now be applied. We hope that this article will help
encourage these new applications.
DATA AVAILABILITY
The data that support the ﬁndings of this study are available from the corresponding
author upon reasonable request.
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
Methodological development and scientiﬁc applications of QMCPACK are currently pri-
marily supported by the U.S. Department of Energy, Oﬃce of Science, Basic Energy Sci-
ences, Materials Sciences and Engineering Division, as part of the Computational Materials
Sciences Program and Center for Predictive Simulation of Functional Materials. Software
developments focused on future Exascale architectures are supported by the Exascale Com-
39

puting Project (17-SC-20-SC), a collaborative eﬀort of the U.S. Department of Energy Oﬃce
of Science and the National Nuclear Security Administration. S.U. and K.D.J. acknowledge
the support of NSF grant CHE-1762337. B.R. acknowledges previous support for the work
described from the U.S. Department of Energy by Lawrence Livermore National Labora-
tory under Contract DEAC52-07NA27344, 15-ERD-013 and NSF grant DMR-1726213. An
award of computer time was provided by the Innovative and Novel Computational Impact
on Theory and Experiment (INCITE) program. This research used resources of the Argonne
Leadership Computing Facility, which is a DOE Oﬃce of Science User Facility supported
under contract DE-AC02-06CH11357. This research also used resources of the Oak Ridge
Leadership Computing Facility, which is a DOE Oﬃce of Science User Facility supported
under Contract DE-AC05-00OR22725. Sandia National Laboratories is a multi-mission lab-
oratory managed and operated by National Technology and Engineering Solutions of Sandia
LLC, a wholly owned subsidiary of Honeywell International, Inc. for the U.S. Department of
Energys National Nuclear Security Administration under Contract No. de-na0003525. This
paper describes objective technical results and analysis. Any subjective views or opinions
that might be expressed in the paper do not necessarily represent the views of the U.S.
Department of Energy or the United States Government.
REFERENCES
1F. Becca, Quantum Monte Carlo Approaches for Correlated Systems (Cambridge Univer-
sity Press, 2017).
2R. M. Martin, L. Reining, and D. M. Ceperley, Interacting Electrons (Cambridge Uni-
versity Press, 2016).
3W. M. C. Foulkes, L. Mitas, R. J. Needs,
and G. Rajagopal, “Quantum Monte Carlo
simulations of solids,” Reviews of Modern Physics 73, 33–83 (2001).
4J. Kim, A. D. Baczewski, T. D. Beaudet, A. Benali, M. C. Bennett, M. A. Berrill, N. S.
Blunt, E. J. L. Borda, M. Casula, D. M. Ceperley, S. Chiesa, B. K. Clark, R. C. Clay,
K. T. Delaney, M. Dewing, K. P. Esler, H. Hao, O. Heinonen, P. R. C. Kent, J. T.
Krogel, I. Kyl¨anp¨a¨a, Y. W. Li, M. G. Lopez, Y. Luo, F. D. Malone, R. M. Martin,
A. Mathuriya, J. McMinis, C. A. Melton, L. Mitas, M. A. Morales, E. Neuscamman,
W. D. Parker, S. D. P. Flores, N. A. Romero, B. M. Rubenstein, J. A. R. Shea, H. Shin,
40

L. Shulenburger, A. F. Tillack, J. P. Townsend, N. M. Tubman, B. V. D. Goetz, J. E.
Vincent, D. C. Yang, Y. Yang, S. Zhang, and L. Zhao, “QMCPACK: an open source ab
initio quantum monte carlo package for the electronic structure of atoms, molecules and
solids,” Journal of Physics: Condensed Matter 30, 195901 (2018).
5C. Genovese, T. Shirakawa, and S. Sorella, “The nature of the quadruple chemical bond
in the dicarbon molecule,” (2019), arXiv:http://arxiv.org/abs/1911.09748v1.
6N. Dupuy and M. Casula, “Fate of the open-shell singlet ground state in the experimen-
tally accessible acenes: A quantum Monte Carlo study,” The Journal of Chemical Physics
148, 134112 (2018).
7J. G. Brandenburg, A. Zen, M. Fitzner, B. Ramberger, G. Kresse, T. Tsatsoulis,
A. Gr¨uneis, A. Michaelides, and D. Alf`e, “Physisorption of Water on Graphene: Subchem-
ical Accuracy from Many-Body Electronic Structure Methods,” The Journal of Physical
Chemistry Letters 10, 358–368 (2019).
8J. Shee, B. Rudshteyn, E. J. Arthur, S. Zhang, D. R. Reichman,
and R. A. Fries-
ner, “On Achieving High Accuracy in Quantum Chemical Calculations of 3d Transition
Metal-Containing Systems: A Comparison of Auxiliary-Field Quantum Monte Carlo with
Coupled Cluster, Density Functional Theory, and Experiment for Diatomic Molecules,”
Journal of Chemical Theory and Computation 15, 2346–2358 (2019).
9K. S. Qin, T. Ichibha, K. Hongo, and R. Maezono, “Inconsistencies in ab initio evaluations
of non-additive contributions of DNA stacking energies,” Chemical Physics 529, 110554
(2020).
10J. Yu, L. K. Wagner, and E. Ertekin, “Fixed-node diﬀusion Monte Carlo description of
nitrogen defects in zinc oxide,” Physical Review B 95, 075209 (2017).
11K. Saritas, W. Ming, M.-H. Du, and F. A. Reboredo, “Excitation Energies of Localized
Correlated Defects via Quantum Monte Carlo: A Case Study of Mn4+ Doped Phosphors,”
The Journal of Physical Chemistry Letters 10, 67–74 (2019).
12B. Busemeyer, G. J. MacDougall, and L. K. Wagner, “Prediction for the singlet-triplet
excitation energy for the spinel MgTi2O4 using ﬁrst-principles diﬀusion Monte Carlo,”
Physical Review B 99, 081118 (2019).
13A. Zen, J. G. Brandenburg, A. Michaelides, and D. Alf`e, “A new scheme for ﬁxed node
diﬀusion quantum Monte Carlo with pseudopotentials: Improving reproducibility and
reducing the trial-wave-function bias,” The Journal of Chemical Physics 151, 134105
41

(2019).
14B. Mussard, E. Coccia, R. Assaraf, M. Otten, C. J. Umrigar, and J. Toulouse, “Time-
Dependent Linear-Response Variational Monte Carlo,” in Novel Electronic Structure The-
ory: General Innovations and Strongly Correlated Systems (Elsevier, 2018) pp. 255–270.
15K. Doblhoﬀ-Dier, G.-J. Kroes, and F. Libisch, “Density functional embedding for peri-
odic and nonperiodic diﬀusion Monte Carlo calculations,” Physical Review B 98, 085138
(2018).
16M. Dash, J. Feldt, S. Moroni, A. Scemama,
and C. Filippi, “Excited States with Se-
lected Conﬁguration Interaction-Quantum Monte Carlo: Chemically Accurate Excitation
Energies and Geometries,” Journal of Chemical Theory and Computation 15, 4896–4906
(2019).
17S. Azadi and W. M. C. Foulkes, “Eﬃcient method for grand-canonical twist averaging in
quantum Monte Carlo calculations,” Physical Review B 100, 245142 (2019).
18M. C. Per, E. K. Fletcher, and D. M. Cleland, “Density functional orbitals in quantum
Monte Carlo: The importance of accurate densities,” The Journal of Chemical Physics
150, 184101 (2019).
19M. Motta, D. M. Ceperley, G. K.-L. Chan, J. A. Gomez, E. Gull, S. Guo, C. A. Jim´enez-
Hoyos, T. N. Lan, J. Li, F. Ma, A. J. Millis, N. V. Prokof’ev, U. Ray, G. E. Scuseria,
S. Sorella, E. M. Stoudenmire, Q. Sun, I. S. Tupitsyn, S. R. White, D. Zgid, and S. Z.
and, “Towards the Solution of the Many-Electron Problem in Real Materials: Equation
of State of the Hydrogen Chain with State-of-the-Art Many-Body Methods,” Physical
Review X 7, 031059 (2017).
20M. Motta and S. Zhang, “Ab initio computations of molecular systems by the auxiliary-
ﬁeld quantum Monte Carlo method,” WIREs Computational Molecular Science 8, e1364
(2018).
21F. Alexander, A. Almgren, J. Bell, A. Bhattacharjee, J. Chen, P. Colella, D. Daniel,
J. DeSlippe, L. Diachin, E. Draeger, A. Dubey, T. Dunning, T. Evans, I. Foster, M. Fran-
cois, T. Germann, M. Gordon, S. Habib, M. Halappanavar, S. Hamilton, W. Hart, Z. H.
Huang, A. Hungerford, D. Kasen, P. R. C. Kent, T. Kolev, D. B. Kothe, A. Kronfeld,
Y. Luo, P. Mackenzie, D. McCallen, B. Messer, S. Mniszewski, C. Oehmen, A. Perazzo,
D. Perez, D. Richards, W. J. Rider, R. Rieben, K. Roche, A. Siegel, M. Sprague, C. Steefel,
R. Stevens, M. Syamlal, M. Taylor, J. Turner, J.-L. Vay, A. F. Voter, T. L. Windus, and
42

K. Yelick, “Exascale applications: skin in the game,” Philosophical Transactions of the
Royal Society A: Mathematical, Physical and Engineering Sciences 378, 20190056 (2020).
22F. Gygi, “Architecture of Qbox: A scalable ﬁrst-principles molecular dynamics code,”
IBM Journal of Research and Development 52, 137–144 (2008).
23Q. Sun, T. C. Berkelbach, N. S. Blunt, G. H. Booth, S. Guo, Z. Li, J. Liu, J. D. McClain,
E. R. Sayfutyarova, S. Sharma, S. Wouters, and G. K. L. Chan, “PySCF: the Python-
based simulations of chemistry framework,” WIREs Computational Molecular Science 8,
e1340 (2017).
24P. Giannozzi, S. Baroni, N. Bonini, M. Calandra, R. Car, C. Cavazzoni, D. Ceresoli, G. L.
Chiarotti, M. Cococcioni, I. Dabo, A. D. Corso, S. de Gironcoli, S. Fabris, G. Fratesi,
R. Gebauer, U. Gerstmann, C. Gougoussis, A. Kokalj, M. Lazzeri, L. Martin-Samos,
N. Marzari, F. Mauri, R. Mazzarello, S. Paolini, A. Pasquarello, L. Paulatto, C. Sbraccia,
S. Scandolo, G. Sclauzero, A. P. Seitsonen, A. Smogunov, P. Umari, and R. M. Wentzcov-
itch, “QUANTUM ESPRESSO: a modular and open-source software project for quantum
simulations of materials,” Journal of Physics: Condensed Matter 21, 395502 (2009).
25Y. Garniron, T. Applencourt, K. Gasperich, A. Benali, A. Fert´e, J. Paquier, B. Pradines,
R. Assaraf, P. Reinhardt, J. Toulouse, P. Barbaresco, N. Renon, G. David, J.-P. Malrieu,
M. V´eril, M. Caﬀarel, P.-F. Loos, E. Giner, and A. Scemama, “Quantum Package 2.0:
An Open-Source Determinant-Driven Suite of Programs,” Journal of Chemical Theory
and Computation 15, 3591–3609 (2019).
26M. W. Schmidt, K. K. Baldridge, J. A. Boatz, S. T. Elbert, M. S. Gordon, J. H. Jensen,
S. Koseki, N. Matsunaga, K. A. Nguyen, S. Su, T. L. Windus, M. Dupuis,
and J. A.
Montgomery, “General atomic and molecular electronic structure system,” Journal of
Computational Chemistry 14, 1347–1363 (1993).
27M. Valiev, E. Bylaska, N. Govind, K. Kowalski, T. Straatsma, H. V. Dam, D. Wang,
J. Nieplocha, E. Apra, T. Windus, and W. de Jong, “NWChem: A comprehensive and
scalable open-source solution for large scale molecular simulations,” Computer Physics
Communications 181, 1477–1489 (2010).
28C. Ortiz, O. Eriksson,
and M. Klintenberg, “Data mining and accelerated electronic
structure theory as a tool in the search for new functional materials,” Computational
Materials Science 44, 1042–1049 (2009).
43

29J. Hachmann, R. Olivares-Amaya, S. Atahan-Evrenk, C. Amador-Bedolla, R. S. S´anchez-
Carrera, A. Gold-Parker, L. Vogt, A. M. Brockway, and A. Aspuru-Guzik, “The Harvard
Clean Energy Project: Large-Scale Computational Screening and Design of Organic Pho-
tovoltaics on the World Community Grid,” The Journal of Physical Chemistry Letters 2,
2241–2251 (2011), http://dx.doi.org/10.1021/jz200866s.
30S. Curtarolo, W. Setyawan, G. L. Hart, M. Jahnatek, R. V. Chepulskii, R. H. Taylor,
S. Wang, J. Xue, K. Yang, O. Levy, M. J. Mehl, H. T. Stokes, D. O. Demchenko, and
D. Morgan, “AFLOW: An automatic framework for high-throughput materials discovery,”
Computational Materials Science 58, 218–226 (2012).
31A. Jain, S. P. Ong, G. Hautier, W. Chen, W. D. Richards, S. Dacek, S. Cholia, D. Gunter,
D. Skinner, G. Ceder, and K. A. Persson, “Commentary: The Materials Project: A ma-
terials genome approach to accelerating materials innovation,” APL Materials 1, 011002
(2013).
32V. Konkov and R. Peverati, “QMC-SW: A simple workﬂow for quantum monte carlo
calculations in chemistry,” SoftwareX 9, 7–14 (2019).
33K. Saritas, T. Mueller, L. Wagner,
and J. C. Grossman, “Investigation of a Quantum
Monte Carlo Protocol To Achieve High Accuracy and High-Throughput Materials For-
mation Energies,” Journal of Chemical Theory and Computation 13, 1943–1951 (2017).
34J. T. Krogel, “Nexus: A modular workﬂow management system for quantum simulation
codes,” Computer Physics Communications 198, 154–168 (2016).
35D. M. Ceperley, “The statistical error of green’s function Monte Carlo,” Journal of Sta-
tistical Physics 43, 815–826 (1986).
36B. L. Hammond, P. J. Reynolds,
and W. A. Lester, “Valence quantum Monte Carlo
with ab initio eﬀective core potentials,” The Journal of Chemical Physics 87, 1130–1136
(1987).
37M. C. Bennett, C. A. Melton, A. Annaberdiyev, G. Wang, L. Shulenburger, and L. Mitas,
“A new generation of eﬀective core potentials for correlated calculations,” The Journal of
Chemical Physics 147, 224106 (2017).
38M. C. Bennett, G. Wang, A. Annaberdiyev, C. A. Melton, L. Shulenburger, and L. Mi-
tas, “A new generation of eﬀective core potentials from correlated calculations: 2nd row
elements,” The Journal of Chemical Physics 149, 104108 (2018).
44

39A. Annaberdiyev, G. Wang, C. A. Melton, M. Chandler Bennett, L. Shulenburger, and
L. Mitas, “A new generation of eﬀective core potentials from correlated calculations: 3d
transition metal series,” The Journal of Chemical Physics 149, 134108 (2018).
40G. Wang, A. Annaberdiyev, C. A. Melton, M. C. Bennett, L. Shulenburger, and L. Mitas,
“A new generation of eﬀective core potentials from correlated calculations: 4s and 4p main
group elements and ﬁrst row additions,” The Journal of Chemical Physics 151, 144110
(2019).
41M. Burkatzki, C. Filippi, and M. Dolg, “Energy-consistent small-core pseudopotentials
for 3d-transition metals adapted to quantum Monte Carlo calculations,” The Journal of
Chemical Physics 129, 164115 (2008).
42M. Dolg, U. Wedig, H. Stoll, and H. Preuss, “Energy-adjusted ab initio pseudopotentials
for the ﬁrst row transition elements,” The Journal of Chemical Physics 86, 866–872 (1987).
43J. R. Trail and R. J. Needs, “Shape and energy consistent pseudopotentials for correlated
electron systems,” The Journal of Chemical Physics 146, 204107 (2017).
44L. Fernandez Pacios and P. A. Christiansen, “Ab initio relativistic eﬀective potentials with
spin-orbit operators. I. Li through Ar,” The Journal of Chemical Physics 82, 2664–2671
(1985).
45W. J. Stevens, H. Basch,
and M. Krauss, “Compact eﬀective potentials and eﬃcient
shared-exponent basis sets for the ﬁrst- and second-row atoms,” The Journal of Chemical
Physics 81, 6026–6033 (1984).
46A. Annaberdiyev, C. A. Melton, M. C. Bennett, G. Wang,
and L. Mitas, “Accurate
Atomic Correlation and Total Energies for Correlation Consistent Eﬀective Core Poten-
tials,” Journal of Chemical Theory and Computation 16, 1482 (2020).
47M. Casula, “Beyond the locality approximation in the standard diﬀusion monte carlo
method,” Physical Review B 74 (2006), 10.1103/physrevb.74.161102.
48T. H. Dunning, K. A. Peterson, and D. E. Woon, “Basis Sets: Correlation Consistent
Sets,” in Encyclopedia of Computational Chemistry (American Cancer Society, 2002).
49L. Kleinman and D. M. Bylander, “Eﬃcacious Form for Model Pseudopotentials,” Phys-
ical Review Letters 48, 1425–1428 (1982).
50T. Wang, X. Zhou, and F. Wang, “Performance of the Diﬀusion Quantum Monte Carlo
Method with a Single-Slater-Jastrow Trial Wavefunction Using Natural Orbitals and Den-
sity Functional Theory Orbitals on Atomization Energies of the Gaussian-2 Set,” The
45

Journal of Physical Chemistry A 123, 3809–3817 (2019).
51X. Zhou, H. Zhao, T. Wang, and F. Wang, “Diﬀusion quantum Monte Carlo calculations
with a recent generation of eﬀective core potentials for ionization potentials and electron
aﬃnities,” Physical Review A 100, 062502 (2019).
52S. Zhang and H. Krakauer, “Quantum Monte Carlo Method using Phase-Free Random
Walks with Slater Determinants,” Physical Review Letters 90, 136401 (2003).
53E. J. Landinez Borda, J. Gomez,
and M. A. Morales, “Non-orthogonal multi-Slater
determinant expansions in auxiliary ﬁeld quantum Monte Carlo,” The Journal of Chemical
Physics 150, 074105 (2019).
54J. Lee, F. D. Malone,
and M. A. Morales, “Utilizing essential symmetry breaking in
auxiliary-ﬁeld quantum monte carlo: Application to the spin gaps of the c36 fullerene and
an iron porphyrin model complex,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2001.05109 (2020).
55S. Zhang, F. D. Malone,
and M. A. Morales, “Auxiliary-ﬁeld quantum Monte Carlo
calculations of the structural properties of nickel oxide,” The Journal of Chemical Physics
149, 164102 (2018).
56F. D. Malone, S. Zhang,
and M. A. Morales, “Overcoming the Memory Bottleneck in
Auxiliary Field Quantum Monte Carlo Simulations with Interpolative Separable Density
Fitting,” J. Chem. Theory. Comput. 15, 256 (2019).
57J. Lee, F. D. Malone,
and M. A. Morales, “An auxiliary-Field quantum Monte Carlo
perspective on the ground state of the dense uniform electron gas: An investigation with
Hartree-Fock trial wavefunctions,” The Journal of Chemical Physics 151, 064122 (2019).
58J. Hubbard, “Calculation of Partition Functions,” Physical Review Letters 3, 77 (1959).
59S. Zhang, J. Carlson, and J. E. Gubernatis, “Constrained path Monte Carlo method for
fermion ground states,” Physical Review B 55, 7464 (1997).
60N. H. F. Beebe and J. Linderberg, “Simpliﬁcations in the generation and transformation of
two-electron integrals in molecular calculations,” Int. J. Quantum Chem. 12, 683 (1977).
61H. Koch, A. S. de Mer´as, and T. B. Pedersen, “Reduced scaling in electronic structure
calculations using Cholesky decompositions,” The Journal of Chemical Physics 118, 9481
(2003).
62F. Aquilante, L. De Vico, N. Ferr´e, G. Ghigo, P.-˚a. Malmqvist, P. Neogr´ady, T. B.
Pedersen, M. Pitoˇn´ak, M. Reiher, B. O. Roos, L. Serrano-Andr´es, M. Urban, V. Veryazov,
and R. Lindh, “MOLCAS 7: The Next Generation,” J. Comput. Chem. 31, 224 (2009).
46

63W. Purwanto, H. Krakauer, Y. Virgus, and S. Zhang, “Assessing weak hydrogen binding
on Ca+ centers: An accurate many-body study with large basis sets,” The Journal of
Chemical Physics 135, 164105 (2011).
64W. Purwanto, S. Zhang,
and H. Krakauer, “Frozen-Orbital and Downfolding Calcu-
lations with Auxiliary-Field Quantum Monte Carlo,” Journal of Chemical Theory and
Computation 9, 4825–4833 (2013).
65E. G. Hohenstein, R. M. Parrish, and T. J. Mart´ınez, “Tensor hypercontraction density
ﬁtting. I. Quartic scaling second- and third-order Møller-Plesset perturbation theory,”
The Journal of Chemical Physics 137, 044103 (2012).
66R. M. Parrish, E. G. Hohenstein, T. J. Mart´ınez,
and C. D. Sherrill, “Tensor hyper-
contraction. II. Least-squares renormalization,” The Journal of Chemical Physics 137,
224106 (2012).
67E. G. Hohenstein, R. M. Parrish, C. D. Sherrill, and T. J. Mart´ınez, “Communication:
Tensor hypercontraction. III. Least-squares tensor hypercontraction for the determination
of correlated wavefunctions,” The Journal of Chemical Physics 137, 221101 (2012).
68J. Lu and L. Ying, “Compression of the electron repulsion integral tensor in tensor hy-
percontraction format with cubic scaling cost,” J. Comput. Phys. 302, 329 (2015).
69W. Hu, L. Lin,
and C. Yang, “Interpolative Separable Density Fitting Decomposition
for Accelerating Hybrid Density Functional Calculations with Applications to Defects in
Silicon,” Journal of Chemical Theory and Computation 13, 5420 (2017).
70K. Dong, W. Hu,
and L. Lin, “Interpolative Separable Density Fitting through Cen-
troidal Voronoi Tessellation with Applications to Hybrid Functional Electronic Structure
Calculations,” Journal of Chemical Theory and Computation 14, 1311 (2018).
71J. Lee, L. Lin, and M. Head-Gordon, “Systematically Improvable Tensor Hypercontrac-
tion: Interpolative Separable Density-Fitting for Molecules Applied to Exact Exchange,
Second- and Third-Order Møller–Plesset Perturbation Theory,” Journal of Chemical The-
ory and Computation 16, 243–263 (2019).
72M. Motta, S. Zhang,
and G. K.-L. Chan, “Hamiltonian symmetries in auxiliary-ﬁeld
quantum Monte Carlo calculations for electronic structure,” Physical Review B 100,
045127 (2019).
73M. Suewattana, W. Purwanto, S. Zhang, H. Krakauer,
and E. J. Walter, “Phaseless
auxiliary-ﬁeld quantum Monte Carlo calculations with plane waves and pseudopotentials:
47

Applications to atoms and molecules,” Physical Review B 75, 245123 (2007).
74F. Ma, S. Zhang, and H. Krakauer, “Auxiliary-ﬁeld quantum Monte Carlo calculations
with multiple-projector pseudopotentials,” Physical Review B 95, 165103 (2017).
75S. Sharma, A. A. Holmes, G. Jeanmairet, A. Alavi, and C. J. Umrigar, “Semistochastic
Heat-Bath Conﬁguration Interaction Method: Selected Conﬁguration Interaction with
Semistochastic Perturbation Theory,” Journal of Chemical Theory and Computation 13,
1595–1604 (2017).
76A. A. Holmes, N. M. Tubman,
and C. J. Umrigar, “Heat-Bath Conﬁguration Interac-
tion: An Eﬃcient Selected Conﬁguration Interaction Algorithm Inspired by Heat-Bath
Sampling,” Journal of Chemical Theory and Computation 12, 3674–3680 (2016).
77C. A. Jim´enez-Hoyos, T. M. Henderson, T. Tsuchimochi, and G. E. Scuseria, “Projected
Hartree–Fock theory,” The Journal of Chemical Physics 136, 164109 (2012).
78C. A. Jim´enez-Hoyos, R. Rodr´ıguez-Guzm´an,
and G. E. Scuseria, “Multi-component
symmetry-projected approach for molecular ground state correlations,” The Journal of
Chemical Physics 139, 204102 (2013).
79R. Schutski, C. A. Jim´enez-Hoyos, and G. E. Scuseria, “Analytic energy gradient for the
projected Hartree–Fock method,” The Journal of Chemical Physics 140, 204101 (2014).
80E. Solomonik, D. Matthews, J. R. Hammond, J. F. Stanton, and J. Demmel, “A mas-
sively parallel tensor contraction framework for coupled-cluster computations,” Journal
of Parallel and Distributed Computing 74, 3176–3190 (2014).
81W. Purwanto and S. Zhang, “Quantum Monte Carlo method for the ground state of
many-boson systems,” Physical Review E 70, 056702 (2004).
82M. Motta and S. Zhang, “Computation of Ground-State Properties in Molecular Systems:
Back-Propagation with Auxiliary-Field Quantum Monte Carlo,” Journal of Chemical The-
ory and Computation 13, 5367 (2017).
83J. Lee, D. W. Small, E. Epifanovsky, and M. Head-Gordon, “Coupled-Cluster Valence-
Bond Singles and Doubles for Strongly Correlated Systems: Block-Tensor Based Imple-
mentation and Application to Oligoacenes,” Journal of Chemical Theory and Computa-
tion 13, 602–615 (2017).
84S. Zhang, “Finite-Temperature Monte Carlo Calculations for Systems with Fermions,”
Physical Review Letters 83, 2777–2780 (1999).
48

85B. M. Rubenstein, S. Zhang, and D. R. Reichman, “Finite-temperature auxiliary-ﬁeld
quantum Monte Carlo technique for Bose-Fermi mixtures,” Physical Review A 86, 053606
(2012).
86Y.-Y. He, M. Qin, H. Shi, Z.-Y. Lu, and S. Zhang, “Finite-temperature auxiliary-ﬁeld
quantum Monte Carlo: Self-consistent constraint and systematic approach to low tem-
peratures,” Physical Review B 99, 045108 (2019).
87Y. Liu, M. Cho,
and B. Rubenstein, “Ab Initio Finite Temperature Auxiliary Field
Quantum Monte Carlo,” Journal of Chemical Theory and Computation 14, 4722–4732
(2018).
88Y.-Y. He, H. Shi, and S. Zhang, “Reaching the Continuum Limit in Finite-Temperature
Ab Initio Field-Theory Computations in Many-Fermion Systems,” Physical Review Let-
ters 123, 136402 (2019).
89M. Dubeck´y, “Noncovalent Interactions by Fixed-Node Diﬀusion Monte Carlo: Conver-
gence of Nodes and Energy Diﬀerences vs Gaussian Basis-Set Size,” Journal of Chemical
Theory and Computation 13, 3626–3635 (2017).
90J. Toulouse and C. J. Umrigar, “Full optimization of Jastrow–Slater wave functions with
application to the ﬁrst-row atoms and homonuclear diatomic molecules,” The Journal of
Chemical Physics 128, 174101 (2008).
91R. Assaraf, S. Moroni, and C. Filippi, “Optimizing the energy with quantum monte carlo:
A lower numerical scaling for jastrow–slater expansions,” Journal of Chemical Theory and
Computation 13, 5273–5281 (2017).
92M. Taddei, M. Ruggeri, S. Moroni, and M. Holzmann, “Iterative backﬂow renormalization
procedure for many-body ground-state wave functions of strongly interacting normal fermi
liquids,” Physical Review B 91 (2015), 10.1103/physrevb.91.115106.
93M. Holzmann and S. Moroni, “Orbital-dependent backﬂow wave functions for real-space
quantum monte carlo,” Physical Review B 99 (2019), 10.1103/physrevb.99.085121.
94M. Casula, C. Attaccalite,
and S. Sorella, “Correlated geminal wave function for
molecules: an eﬃcient resonating valence bond approach,” The Journal of Chemical
Physics 121, 7110–7126 (2004).
95P. K. V. V. Nukala and P. R. C. Kent, “A fast and eﬃcient algorithm for Slater deter-
minant updates in quantum Monte Carlo simulations,” The Journal of Chemical Physics
130, 204105 (2009).
49

96B. K. Clark, M. A. Morales, J. McMinis, J. Kim, and G. E. Scuseria, “Computing the
energy of a water molecule using multideterminants: A simple, eﬃcient algorithm,” The
Journal of Chemical Physics 135, 244105 (2011).
97M. A. Morales, J. McMinis, B. K. Clark, J. Kim, and G. E. Scuseria, “Multideterminant
Wave Functions in Quantum Monte Carlo,” Journal of Chemical Theory and Computation
8, 2181–2188 (2012).
98B. Huron, J. P. Malrieu, and P. Rancurel, “Iterative perturbation calculations of ground
and excited state energies from multiconﬁgurational zeroth-order wavefunctions,” The
Journal of Chemical Physics 58, 5745–5759 (1973).
99A. Scemama, M. Caﬀarel, A. Benali, D. Jacquemin, and P.-F. Loos, “Inﬂuence of pseu-
dopotentials on excitation energies from selected conﬁguration interaction and diﬀusion
Monte Carlo,” Results in Chemistry 1, 100002 (2019).
100A. Scemama, A. Benali, D. Jacquemin, M. Caﬀarel, and P.-F. Loos, “Excitation energies
from diﬀusion Monte Carlo using selected conﬁguration interaction nodes,” The Journal
of Chemical Physics 149, 034108 (2018).
101A. D. Chien, A. A. Holmes, M. Otten, C. J. Umrigar, S. Sharma, and P. M. Zimmer-
man, “Excited States of Methylene, Polyenes, and Ozone from Heat-Bath Conﬁguration
Interaction,” The Journal of Physical Chemistry A 122, 2714–2722 (2018).
102J. Li, M. Otten, A. A. Holmes, S. Sharma, and C. J. Umrigar, “Fast semistochastic heat-
bath conﬁguration interaction,” The Journal of Chemical Physics 149, 214110 (2018).
103M. Caﬀarel, T. Applencourt, E. Giner, and A. Scemama, “Communication: Toward an
improved control of the ﬁxed-node error in quantum Monte Carlo: The case of the water
molecule,” The Journal of Chemical Physics 144, 151103 (2016).
104A. Scemama, T. Applencourt, E. Giner,
and M. Caﬀarel, “Accurate nonrelativistic
ground-state energies of 3d transition metal atoms,” The Journal of Chemical Physics
141, 244110 (2014).
105E. Giner, A. Scemama,
and M. Caﬀarel, “Using perturbatively selected conﬁguration
interaction in quantum Monte Carlo calculations,” Canadian Journal of Chemistry 91,
879–885 (2013).
106J. Berkowitz, H. A. Tasman,
and W. A. Chupka, “Double-Oven Experiments with
Lithium Halide Vapors,” The Journal of Chemical Physics 36, 2170–2179 (1962).
50

107J. Aigueperse, P. Mollard, D. Devilliers, M. Chemla, R. Faron, R. Romano, and J. P. Cuer,
“Fluorine Compounds, Inorganic,” in Ullmann’s Encyclopedia of Industrial Chemistry
(American Cancer Society, 2000).
108L. Zhao and E. Neuscamman, “An Eﬃcient Variational Principle for the Direct Opti-
mization of Excited states,” Journal of Chemical Theory and Computation 12, 3436–3440
(2016).
109J. A. R. Shea and E. Neuscamman, “Size Consistent Excited States via Algorithmic
Transformations between Variational Principles,” Journal of Chemical Theory and Com-
putation 13, 6078–6088 (2017).
110P. J. Robinson, S. D. P. Flores, and E. Neuscamman, “Excitation variance matching with
limited conﬁguration interaction expansions in variational Monte Carlo,” The Journal of
Chemical Physics 147, 164114 (2017).
111G. Onida, L. Reining, and A. Rubio, “Electronic excitations: density-functional versus
many-body Green’s-function approaches,” Rev. Mod. Phys. 74, 601–659 (2002).
112L. Zhao and E. Neuscamman, “Variational Excitations in Real Solids: Optical Gaps and
Insights into Many-Body Perturbation Theory,” Physical Review Letters 123, 036402
(2019).
113F. Fuchs, J. Furthm¨uller, F. Bechstedt, M. Shishkin, and G. Kresse, “Quasiparticle band
structure based on a generalized Kohn-Sham scheme,” Physical Review B 76, 115109
(2007).
114S. Tsoi, X. Lu, A. K. Ramdas, H. Alawadhi, M. Grimsditch, M. Cardona, and R. Lauck,
“Isotopic-mass dependence of the A, B, and C excitonic band gaps in ZnO at low tem-
peratures,” Physical Review B 74, 165203 (2006).
115B.-C. Shih, Y. Xue, P. Zhang, M. L. Cohen, and S. G. Louie, “Quasiparticle Band Gap of
ZnO: High Accuracy from the Conventional G0W0 Approach,” Physical Review Letters
105, 146401 (2010).
116E. Fermi and E. Teller, “The Capture of Negative Mesotrons in Matter,” Physical Review
72, 399–408 (1947).
117R. F. Wallis, R. Herman, and H. W. Milnes, “Energy levels of an electron in the ﬁeld of
a ﬁnite dipole,” Journal of Molecular Spectroscopy 4, 51–74 (1960).
118O. H. Crawford, “Bound states of a charged particle in a dipole ﬁeld,” Proceedings of the
Physical Society 91, 279–284 (1967).
51

119J. E. Turner, V. E. Anderson,
and K. Fox, “Ground-State Energy Eigenvalues and
Eigenfunctions for an Electron in an Electric-Dipole Field,” Physical Review 174, 81–89
(1968).
120J. Simons and K. D. Jordan, “Ab initio electronic structure of anions,” Chemical Reviews
87, 535–555 (1987), https://doi.org/10.1021/cr00079a004.
121K.
D.
Jordan
and
F.
Wang,
“Theory
of
Dipole-Bound
An-
ions,”
Annual
Review
of
Physical
Chemistry
54,
367–396
(2003),
https://doi.org/10.1146/annurev.physchem.54.011002.103851.
122J. Xu and K. D. Jordan, “Application of the Diﬀusion Monte Carlo Method to the Binding
of Excess Electrons to Water Clusters,” The Journal of Physical Chemistry A 114, 1364–
1366 (2010), pMID: 19788288, https://doi.org/10.1021/jp9066108.
123H. Hao, J. Shee, S. Upadhyay, C. Ataca, K. D. Jordan,
and B. M. Rubenstein, “Ac-
curate Predictions of Electron Binding Energies of Dipole-Bound Anions via Quantum
Monte Carlo Methods,” The Journal of Physical Chemistry Letters 9, 6185–6190 (2018),
https://doi.org/10.1021/acs.jpclett.8b02733.
124V. K. Voora, A. Kairalapova, T. Sommerfeld, and K. D. Jordan, “Theoretical approaches
for treating non-valence correlation-bound anions,” The Journal of Chemical Physics 147,
214114 (2017).
125K. Raghavachari, G. W. Trucks, J. A. Pople, and M. Head-Gordon, “A ﬁfth-order per-
turbation comparison of electron correlation theories,” Chemical Physics Letters 157,
479–483 (1989).
126J. F. Stanton and R. J. Bartlett, “The equation of motion coupledcluster method. a sys-
tematic biorthogonal approach to molecular excitation energies, transition probabilities,
and excited state properties,” The Journal of Chemical Physics 98, 7029–7039 (1993).
127J. F. Stanton and J. Gauss, “Analytic energy derivatives for ionized states described by
the equationofmotion coupled cluster method,” The Journal of Chemical Physics 101,
8938–8944 (1994).
128M. Nooijen and R. J. Bartlett, “Equation of motion coupled cluster method for electron
attachment,” The Journal of Chemical Physics 102, 3629–3647 (1995).
129S. A. Kucharski, M. W loch, M. Musia l, and R. J. Bartlett, “Coupled-cluster theory for
excited electronic states: The full equation-of-motion coupled-cluster single, double, and
triple excitation method,” The Journal of Chemical Physics 115, 8263–8266 (2001).
52

130T. H. Dunning, “Gaussian basis sets for use in correlated molecular calculations. i. the
atoms boron through neon and hydrogen,” The Journal of Chemical Physics 90, 1007–
1023 (1989).
131R. A. Kendall, T. H. Dunning,
and R. J. Harrison, “Electron aﬃnities of the ﬁrstrow
atoms revisited. systematic basis sets and wave functions,” The Journal of Chemical
Physics 96, 6796–6806 (1992).
132A. D. Becke, “Densityfunctional thermochemistry. iii. the role of exact exchange,” The
Journal of Chemical Physics 98, 5648–5652 (1993).
133C. Lee, W. Yang, and R. G. Parr, “Development of the colle-salvetti correlation-energy
formula into a functional of the electron density,” Phys. Rev. B 37, 785–789 (1988).
134S. H. Vosko, L. Wilk, and M. Nusair, “Accurate spin-dependent electron liquid correlation
energies for local spin density calculations: a critical analysis,” Canadian Journal of
Physics 58, 1200–1211 (1980).
135M. G. Brik and A. M. Srivastava, “On the Optical Properties of the Mn4+ Ion in Solids,”
Journal of Luminescence 133, 69–72 (2013).
136S. Geschwind, P. Kisliuk, M. P. Klein, J. P. Remeika,
and D. L. Wood, “Sharp-Line
Fluorescence, Electron Paramagnetic Resonance, and Thermoluminescence of Mn4+ in
-Al2O3,” Physical Review 126, 1684–1686 (1962).
137K. Dunphy and W. W. Duley, “Multiphoton Excitation of Mn4+ and Cr3+ Luminescence
in MgO,” Journal of Physics and Chemistry of Solids 51, 1077–1082 (1990).
138M. G. Brik and A. M. Srivastava, “Ab Initio Studies of the Structural, Electronic, and
Optical Properties of K2SiF6 Single Crystals at Ambient and Elevated Hydrostatic Pres-
sure,” Journal of Electrochemical Society 159, J212–J216 (2012).
139M. G. Medvedev, I. S. Bushmarinov, J. Sun, J. P. Perdew, and K. A. Lyssenko, “Density
Functional Theory Is Straying from the Path Toward the Exact Functional,” Science 355,
49–52 (2017).
140P. Lindner, “Theoretical Momentum Densities,” Physica Scripta 15, 112–118 (1977).
141B. G. Williams, “The Experimental Determination of Electron Momentum Densities,”
Physica Scripta 15, 92–111 (1977).
142M. J. Cooper, “Compton scattering and electron momentum determination,” Reports on
Progress in Physics 48, 415–481 (1985).
53

143F. Bell and J. R. Schneider, “Three-dimensional electron momentum densities of solids,”
Journal of Physics: Condensed Matter 13, 7905–7922 (2001).
144S. B. Dugdale, “Life on the edge: a beginner’s guide to the Fermi surface,” Physica Scripta
91, 053009 (2016).
145D. G. Lock, V. H. C. Crisp, and R. N. West, “Positron annihilation and Fermi surface
studies: a new approach,” Journal of Physics F: Metal Physics 3, 561–570 (1973).
146S. B. Dugdale, R. J. Watts, J. Laverock, Z. Major, M. A. Alam, M. Samsel-Czeka la,
G. Kontrym-Sznajd, Y. Sakurai, M. Itou, and D. Fort, “Observation of a Strongly Nested
Fermi Surface in the Shape-Memory AlloyNi0.62Al0.38,” Physical Review Letters 96 (2006),
10.1103/physrevlett.96.046406.
147S. Huotari, J. A. Soininen, T. Pylkk¨anen, K. H¨am¨al¨ainen, A. Issolah, A. Titov, J. McMi-
nis, J. Kim, K. Esler, D. M. Ceperley, M. Holzmann,
and V. Olevano, “Momentum
Distribution and Renormalization Factor in Sodium and the Electron Gas,” Physical Re-
view Letters 105, 0860403 (2010).
148M. Holzmann, B. Bernu, C. Pierleoni, J. McMinis, D. M. Ceperley, V. Olevano,
and
L. D. Site, “Momentum Distribution of the Homogeneous Electron Gas,” Physical Review
Letters 107, 110402 (2011).
149R. N. Silver and P. E. Sokol, eds., Momentum Distributions (Plenum Press, New York,
1989).
150N. Hiraoka and T. Nomura, “Electron momentum densities near Dirac cones: Anisotropic
Umklapp scattering and momentum broadening,” Scientiﬁc Reports 7, 765 (2017).
151I. Kyl¨anp¨a¨a, Y. Luo, O. Heinonen, P. R. C. Kent, and J. T. Krogel, “Compton proﬁle
of VO2 across the metal-insulator transition: Evidence of a non-Fermi liquid metal,”
Physical Review B 99, 075154 (2019).
152F. Zambelli, L. Pitaevskii, D. M. Stamper-Kurn, and S. Stringari, “Dynamic structure
factor and momentum distribution of a trapped Bose gas,” Physical Review A 61, 063608
(2000).
153S. Lee, K. Hippalgaonkar, F. Yang, J. Hong, C. Ko, J. Suh, K. Liu, K. Wang, J. J. Urban,
X. Zhang, C. Dames, S. A. Hartnoll, O. Delaire, and J. Wu, “Anomalously low electronic
thermal conductivity in metallic vanadium dioxide,” Science 355, 371–374 (2017).
54
