Graph Convolutional Neural Networks for Polymers
Property Prediction
Minggang Zeng
Deep Learning Department, Institute for Infocomm Research,
A*STAR (Agency for Science, Technology and Research)
1 Fusionopolis Way, ♯21-01 Connexis, Singapore 138632
Jatin Nitin Kumar
Soft Materials, Institute of Materials Research and Engineering
2 Fusionopolis Way, ♯08-03 Innovis, Singapore 138634
Zeng Zeng
Deep Learning Department, Institute for Infocomm Research,
A*STAR (Agency for Science, Technology and Research)
1 Fusionopolis Way, ♯21-01 Connexis, Singapore 138632
Ramasamy Savitha
Deep Learning Department, Institute for Infocomm Research,
A*STAR (Agency for Science, Technology and Research)
1 Fusionopolis Way, ♯21-01 Connexis, Singapore 138632
Vijay Ramaseshan Chandrasekhar ∗
Deep Learning Department, Institute for Infocomm Research,
A*STAR (Agency for Science, Technology and Research)
1 Fusionopolis Way, ♯21-01 Connexis, Singapore 138632
vijay@i2r.a-star.edu.sg
Kedar Hippalgaonkar ∗
Electronic Materials, Institute of Materials Research and Engineering
2 Fusionopolis Way, ♯08-03 Innovis, Singapore 138634
kedarh@imre.a-star.edu.sg
Abstract
A fast and accurate predictive tool for polymer properties is demanding and will
pave the way to iterative inverse design. In this work, we apply graph convolutional
neural networks (GCNN) to predict the dielectric constant and energy bandgap
of polymers. Using density functional theory (DFT) calculated properties as
the ground truth, GCNN can achieve remarkable agreement with DFT results.
Moreover, we show that GCNN outperforms other machine learning algorithms.
Our work proves that GCNN relies only on morphological data of polymers and
removes the requirement for complicated hand-crafted descriptors, while still
offering accuracy in fast predictions.
∗equal corresponding author
Preprint. Work in progress.
arXiv:1811.06231v1  [cond-mat.mtrl-sci]  15 Nov 2018

1
Introduction
Polymers are materials with tunable structures and chemical functionality that inﬂuence their physical
and chemical properties.[1] A deep understanding of the relationship between structure and properties
is required for innovating novel materials. However, this relationship is complex and often not well
understood.[2] Density Functional Theory (DFT) is useful in estimating bulk polymer properties,
but is computationally expensive. It has been applied on small molecules, and a 20,000 size dataset
was generated as a part of the Harvard Clean Energy Project [3]. Using a subset from this data,
by representing molecules as graphs (with individual atoms as vertices and bonds as edges), a
neural ﬁngerprinting approach expanding upon a Simpliﬁed Molecular-Input Line-Entry System
(SMILES) enabled high predictive capability of solubility, drug efﬁcacy and photovoltaic efﬁciency
[4]. Following this, a reinforced adversarial neural computer based on reinforcement learning allowed
access to a broad chemical space towards predictive synthesis of small molecules [5]. Moving beyond
small molecules, to enable property prediction for bulk polymers, high-throughput DFT calculations
were performed on different repeat units to provide a “ﬁngerprint”, from which the ﬁnal polymer
properties were derived algorithmically.[6] Bypassing DFT for ﬁngerprinting and instead using direct
morphological information would be a signiﬁcant advance in the discovery of new materials and
shorten the development time for material innovation. To achieve this, a strong understanding of the
relevant and most useful material descriptors inﬂuencing the polymer properties is required.
Describing the polymer in its most basic form typically constitutes identifying the atoms that make
up the material as well as their arrangement with respect to each other, determined by the type of
bonding that holds the material together. For inorganic crystals, where long range order is necessary,
the material can be described as a lattice and a basis, where the lattice reﬂects the symmetry of
the crystal structure, while the basis is the repeating unit. Polymers, on the other hand, are largely
amorphous. This is because they do not exhibit such long range order as they do not conform to
any lattice unless speciﬁcally phase controlled. However, certain polymeric properties are intrinsic
to the monomer unit and translate well to actual applications. This is especially true for ground
state properties such as the dielectric constant and the polymer bandgap. The dielectric constant is a
reﬂection of the electronic polarizability of the polymer and is a consequence of the bonding nature
between the constituent atoms. Typically, the bandgap depends upon the strength of the bonding.
Therefore, one would expect that knowing the atoms that constitute the monomer as well as how they
bond with each other - resulting in a ﬁngerprint morphological character - is sufﬁcient information
to predict these properties. Such information is uniquely contained in a polymer’s Crystallographic
Information File (CIF), which can then be converted to a two-dimensional (2D) graph and used as an
input into a convolutional neural network to predict the above-mentioned properties.
In addition to morphological character intrinsic to the polymer, typically, environmental considera-
tions are also important. Their physio-chemical environment is a complex multi-variable parameter
space; intra and inter chain effects due to multi-valency and chain coiling affects functional properties,
but is expected to be less inﬂuential for ground state properties. More complex descriptors that have
been used in complementary approaches involve a combination of detailed atomic and morphological
information along with environmental interactions.[7] In our work, we predict the dielectric constant
and the bandgap of a large class of polymer compounds using the elegant graph convolutional neural
network (GCNN) and ﬁnd that the predictions are better than those where complex descriptors have
been used in the recent past as illustrated in Figure 1. Speciﬁcally, by comparing to traditional
descriptors, our mean absolute errors are lower than those obtained by other machine learning tech-
niques. This clariﬁes that to achieve speed and accuracy in predictions, we only need to consider the
morphological character of polymers.
2
Dataset
To investigate the accuracy of GCNN on predicting physical properties of polymers, we use the
publicly available dataset at the Polymergenome Project.[8, 9, 10, 11, 7] The main purpose of this
dataset is to develop polymers for energy storage and electronics applications. The dataset covers
1073 polymers that can be classiﬁed as organic or organometallic which can be further divided into
three subsets according to their sources. The ﬁrst subset has 34 common polymers that have been
synthesized in experiments, like polyethylene, polyureas, polythioureas, polyesters, etc.. The second
subset adopted from the Crystallography Open Database (COD) contains another 253 organic and
2

www.polymergenome.org
Polymer 
Label
Descriptors
Properties
SMILES
QSPR
Morphol-
ogy
Dielectric 
Constant
Bandgap
Polyurea
D11
D12
D13
ε1
Eg1
Poly(viny
l 
chloride)
D21
D22
D23
ε2
Eg2
Poly(2-
cyano
heptyl
acrylate)
D31
D32
D33
ε3
Eg3
……
….
….
….
….
….
C6H4-
C4H2S-
C4H2S-
C4H2S-
Dn1
Dn2
Dn3
εn
Egn
+ ……
Traditional Methodology
Graph CNN
CIF File – 3D morphological 
and atomic data
Individual 
descriptors
Vectorization
Graph CNN
Prediction
Figure 1: Schematic comparison between GCNN and other machine learning algorithms. The
traditional methodology relies on hand engineered features crafted from SMILE string, quantitative
structure-property relationship and morphology of polymers. One remarkable advantage of graph
CNN is its ability to automatically learn the chemical environment of polymers and map polymer
structure to abundant feature vectors for a fast and accurate prediction on polymer properties.
organometallic polymers. The last subset generated from computational methods includes 314 organic
polymers and 472 organometallic polymers. The polymer building blocks in this subset include
organic –CH2–, –NH–, –CO–, –O–, –CS–, –C6H4–, and –C4H2S–, as well as metal-containing
inorganic blocks, such as –COO–Sn(CH3)2–OCC–, –SnF2–, and –SnCl2–. The polymer building
block repeats along the 3-dimensional crystal axis, and the repeat unit with symmetry information is
fed into the GCNN.
3
Experimental Setup
3.1
Input
To build a regression model, the input of GCNN includes CIF ﬁles recording the structure of the
polymers, the target properties for each polymer and a JSON ﬁle that stores the initialization vector
for each atom.
3.2
Model Architecture
A polymer graph can be represented by nodes and edges using the atomic feature vector vi and
the bonding feature vector u(i;j)k, respectively.[4, 12, 13, 14] These vectors are obtained by one
hot encoding. With the help of a non-linear convolution function, the multiple convolutional lay-
ers automatically learn the atomic features after iterating through surrounding chemical features
(atoms/bonds) and different convolutional layers. A pooling layer of normalized summation is then
3

Table 1: Hyperparmeters for different algorithms
Method
Hyperparameters
GCNN for ε (Eg)
Learning rate: 0.001 (0.01), momentum: 0.9 (0.8),
hidden-feature-length: 256 (64), weight decay: 1e-8 (1e-5),
atomic-feature-length: 32 (32),
number of CNN layers: 2 (5),
number of hidden layer: 2 (5)
Kernel Regression
alpha: 1e-05, gamma: 1.25e-09, kernel: rbf
Random Forest
min_samples_leaf: 10, n_estimators: 150, oob_score: True
Gradient Boosting
alpha: 0.7, learning_rate: 0.1, max_depth: 5
Neural Network
alpha: 0.001, hidden_layer_sizes: 100, momentum: 0.7
used to generate an overall feature vector vc. To improve the performance of the GCNN, two fully
connected hidden layers are added to capture the complicated structure-property relationship. Finally,
an output layer connected to the top hidden layer is used to predict the physical property of polymers.
3.3
Hyperparameter Optimization
The database is randomly divided into training, validation and test sets with the ratio of 6:2:2.
The network parameters are optimized via Stochastic Gradient Descent (SGD), and the optimum
hyperparameters are determined by the lowest mean absolute error (MAE) in the validation set using
the DFT result as the ground truth.
4
Predictive Performance
We ran two experiments to demonstrate that GCNN can obtain comparable accuracy to DFT for
polymers. Here we focus on the bandgap (Eg) and the dielectric constant (ε). These two properties
are important in order to screen polymer materials regardless of speciﬁc applications. The DFT
results of Eg and ε are used as the ground truth. They are obtained with hybrid electron exchange-
correlation functionals and density functional perturbation theory, respectively.[8] The optimized
hyperparameters of GCNN for Eg and ε are listed in Table 1. Figures 2(a,b) compare the predictive
performance of GCNN versus the DFT ground truth. Impressive agreement with DFT is found in
predicting the dielectric constant. A MAE value of 0.24 is achieved on the test set, which is lower
than the published work using a similar dataset and Gaussian process regression.[7] Given the error
of DFT calculations compared with experiments and the small MAE obtained in our study, GCNN
may achieve accuracy in predicting polymer properties as compared to experiments. Comparatively,
a higher MAE (0.41 eV) is found using GCNN to predict the energy bandgap of the polymer dataset.
We illustrate the data distribution for Eg and ε in Figure 2(c). The dielectric constant of the dataset is
mainly concentrated in the region of ε = 3, with the mean and variation of 3.47 and 0.92, respectively.
Comparatively, the Eg is much more dispersed (mean = 4.417 eV, variation = 2.75 eV) with an
obvious tail weighted in the high bandgap range. Therefore, the MAE is high since lesser data is
available for the polymer in this energy bandgap tail region. The inset of Figure 2(b) shows the MAE
for Eg as the function of dataset size. We ﬁnd a systematic decrease in MAE with increasing the
size of dataset from 128, 256, 512 to 1024. This indicates the prediction of Eg by GCNN can be
improved if more polymer data are provided.[7].
5
Comparison with other Machine Learning methods
Besides GCNN, where we only use the cif and the atomic .json ﬁles as inputs, we also use other
Machine Learning (ML) methods to establish a regression model for the polymer structure-property
relationship. The feature extraction of the polymer dataset is implemented with the Matminer
package.[15] Table 3 lists the feature extraction modules that we apply, which produces 158 individual
feature descriptors. These hand-crafted features reﬂect some key physical and chemical properties of
polymer systems, such as structural heterogeneity and chemical ordering. Based on these physically
relevant descriptors, we apply a series of machine learning algorithms using the Scikit-learn package
4

1
2
3
4
5
DFT
0
2
4
GCNN
MAE = 0.24
Dielectric Constant
2
4
6
8
10
DFT
0
5
10
MAE = 0.41
Bandgap (eV)
Property Distribution
5
10
Value
Eg
Number of atoms in polymers
0
100
500
1000
Dataset Size
0.5
0.6
MAE
Figure 2: (a,b) The predicted dielectric constant and bandgap by GCNN compared with the DFT
results, showing that the GCNN is an accurate predictive tool. The inset of (b) shows a systematic
decrease in MAE with increasing the size of dataset from 128, 256, 512 to 1024. (c) Value distribution
showing a narrow range for the dielectric constant and a wider range for the bandgap. (d)Statistics
showing the large range in the number of atoms in each polymer; the GCNN does not discriminate
against large polymers and is still able to achieve good prediction.
Table 2: Summary of the prediction performance of three different properties by different ML methods
MAE
Property
GCNN
Kernel Regression
Random Forest
Gradient Boosting
Neural Network
ε
0.24
0.425
0.355
0.359
0.59
Eg(eV )
0.41
0.652
0.505
0.446
0.509
to study the structure-property relationship of the polymer dataset. The ML models have internal
4-fold cross-validation to minimise over-ﬁtting and ensure model generality. The models are trained
using SGD with the ADAM optimizer; and the GridSearchCV method in Scikit-Learn is applied to
tune hyperparameters. The optimized hyperparameters are listed in Table 1; and the MAE values
of these ML algorithms are listed in Table 2. It can be seen that GCNN outperforms all these ML
algorithms in predicting the Eg and ε within this polymer dataset. This indicates that the feature
vectors generated from the GCNN function better in predicting the physical properties of polymers.
This may come from the fact that GCNN feature vectors take into account global spatial geometry, as
well as accurate local atomic conﬁguration, as listed in Table 3. As shown by the statistic analysis of
the polymer dataset in Figure 2(d), GCNN works well even on long polymer chains, regardless of a
simpliﬁed graphical representation. Our results suggest that GCNN has the potential to serve as an
excellent forward predictive model for polymers.
6
Discussion and Future Work
Given the strength of the GCNN predictions, it is good to note that the present approach has two
limitations. The ﬁrst is that the ground truth is based on simulations rather than experimental data,
which is a result of the difﬁculty of performing high-throughput experiments and hence sparse
experimental data. The second is that the present technique only allows for the prediction of
bulk polymeric properties as opposed to polymer-solvent interactions and composites. While the
ﬁrst limitation is due to lack of data availability, the second could be addressed by investigating
5

Table 3: Comparison between the GCNN generated feature classes and the hand-crafted feature
classes obtained via the Matminer package. The Kernel Regression, Random Forest, Gradient
Boosting and Neural Network algorithms use these listed hand-crafted feature classes.
Hand-crafted feature classes
GCNN generated feature classes
Structural Heterogeneity
Group number
Chemical Ordering
Period number
Maximum Packing Efﬁciency
Electronegativity
Stoichiometry
Covalent radius
Element Property
Valence electrons
Valence Orbital
First ionization energy
Ionic Property
Electron afﬁnity
(s,p,d,f) Block
Atomic volume
Atomic distance
feature importance using the GCNN to allow for interpretability. We seek inspiration from a
recent work on developing a methodology of vectorizing individual molecular descriptors via multi-
dimensional correlation to account for such complexities, thereby enabling the discovery of novel
functional molecules.[16] This will then allow us to build an accurate yet fundamental design-property
understanding which in turn could predict experimental polymer behaviour. Moreover, this sort of
understanding could also extend the capability beyond bulk polymers to polymer composites and
polymers in solution. Most importantly this strong understanding of polymers will allow us to predict
the required chemical and structural design of a polymer based on its physical property requirement -
the problem of inverse design – which would lead to huge impact in both industry and academia.
7
Conclusion
We applied several machine learning algorithms to predict dielectric constant and bandgap from a
large dataset of crystallography data of polymers. Our models included graph convolution neural
network, random forest, kernel regression, gradient boosting and conventional neural network, where
the lowest mean absolute error for both properties were reported for GCNN. These results indicate
that GCNN offers an effective approach for fast and accurate prediction of polymer properties starting
from the atomic and morphological character of polymer. This conceptual advance allows us to move
into the realm of faster predictions, relying on a smaller amount of metadata, and paves the way for
inverse design, where polymers can be designed with a ﬁnal property in mind.
References
[1] Andrew Gregory and Martina H Stenzel. Complex polymer architectures via raft polymerization:
From fundamental process to extending the scope using click chemistry and nature’s building
blocks. Progress in Polymer Science, 37(1):38, 2012.
[2] Charles E Carraher Jr and RB Seymour.
Structure—Property Relationships in Polymers.
Springer Science & Business Media, 2012.
[3] Johannes Hachmann, Roberto Olivares-Amaya, Sule Atahan-Evrenk, Carlos Amador-Bedolla,
Roel S Sánchez-Carrera, Aryeh Gold-Parker, Leslie Vogt, Anna M Brockway, and Alán Aspuru-
Guzik. The harvard clean energy project: large-scale computational screening and design of
organic photovoltaics on the world community grid. The Journal of Physical Chemistry Letters,
2(17):2241, 2011.
[4] David K Duvenaud, Dougal Maclaurin, Jorge Iparraguirre, Rafael Bombarell, Timothy Hirzel,
Alán Aspuru-Guzik, and Ryan P Adams. Convolutional networks on graphs for learning
molecular ﬁngerprints. In Advances in neural information processing systems, page 2224, 2015.
[5] Evgeny Putin, Arip Asadulaev, Yan Ivanenkov, Vladimir Aladinskiy, Benjamin Sánchez-
Lengeling, Alán Aspuru-Guzik, and Alex Zhavoronkov. Reinforced adversarial neural computer
for de novo molecular design. Journal of chemical information and modeling, 2018.
6

[6] Arun Mannodi-Kanakkithodi, Ghanshyam Pilania, Tran Doan Huan, Turab Lookman, and
Rampi Ramprasad. Machine learning strategy for accelerated design of polymer dielectrics.
Scientiﬁc reports, 6:20952, 2016.
[7] Chiho Kim, Anand Chandrasekaran, Tran Doan Huan, Deya Das, and Rampi Ramprasad.
Polymer genome: A data-powered polymer informatics platform for property predictions. The
Journal of Physical Chemistry C, 2018.
[8] Tran Doan Huan, Arun Mannodi-Kanakkithodi, Chiho Kim, Vinit Sharma, Ghanshyam Pilania,
and Rampi Ramprasad. A polymer dataset for accelerated property prediction and design.
Scientiﬁc data, 3:160012, 2016.
[9] Arun Mannodi-Kanakkithodi, Tran Doan Huan, and Rampi Ramprasad. Mining Materials
Design Rules from Data: The Example of Polymer Dielectrics. CHEMISTRY OF MATERIALS,
29(21):9001, 2017.
[10] Arun Mannodi-Kanakkithodi, Ghanshyam Pilania, and Rampi Ramprasad. Critical assessment
of regression-based machine learning methods for polymer dielectrics. COMPUTATIONAL
MATERIALS SCIENCE, 125:123, 2016.
[11] Arun Mannodi-Kanakkithodi, Anand Chandrasekaran, Chiho Kim, Tran Doan Huan, Ghan-
shyam Pilania, Venkatesh Botu, and Rampi Ramprasad. Scoping the polymer genome: A
roadmap for rational polymer dielectrics design and beyond. Materials Today, 2017.
[12] Justin Gilmer, Samuel S Schoenholz, Patrick F Riley, Oriol Vinyals, and George E Dahl. Neural
message passing for quantum chemistry. arXiv preprint arXiv:1704.01212, 2017.
[13] Tian Xie and Jeffrey C Grossman. Hierarchical visualization of materials space with graph
convolutional neural networks. arXiv preprint arXiv:1807.03404, 2018.
[14] Tian Xie and Jeffrey C. Grossman. Crystal graph convolutional neural networks for an accurate
and interpretable prediction of material properties. Phys. Rev. Lett., 120:145301, Apr 2018.
[15] Logan Ward, Alexander Dunn, Alireza Faghaninia, Nils ER Zimmermann, Saurabh Bajaj,
Qi Wang, Joseph Montoya, Jiming Chen, Kyle Bystrom, Maxwell Dylla, et al. Matminer: An
open source toolkit for materials data mining. Computational Materials Science, 152:60, 2018.
[16] Rafael Gómez-Bombarelli, Jennifer N Wei, David Duvenaud, José Miguel Hernández-Lobato,
Benjamín Sánchez-Lengeling, Dennis Sheberla, Jorge Aguilera-Iparraguirre, Timothy D Hirzel,
Ryan P Adams, and Alán Aspuru-Guzik. Automatic chemical design using a data-driven
continuous representation of molecules. ACS central science, 4(2):268, 2018.
7
