DEEP LEARNING SCALING IS PREDICTABLE, EMPIRICALLY
Joel Hestness, Sharan Narang, Newsha Ardalani, Gregory Diamos, Heewoo Jun,
Hassan Kianinejad, Md. Mostofa Ali Patwary, Yang Yang, Yanqi Zhou
{joel,sharan,ardalaninewsha,gregdiamos,junheewoo,hassankianinejad,
patwarymostofa,yangyang62,zhouyanqi}@baidu.com
Baidu Research
ABSTRACT
Deep learning (DL) creates impactful advances following a virtuous recipe: model
architecture search, creating large training data sets, and scaling computation. It
is widely believed that growing training sets and models should improve accuracy
and result in better products. As DL application domains grow, we would like a
deeper understanding of the relationships between training set size, computational
scale, and model accuracy improvements to advance the state-of-the-art.
This paper presents a large scale empirical characterization of generalization error
and model size growth as training sets grow. We introduce a methodology for
this measurement and test four machine learning domains: machine translation,
language modeling, image processing, and speech recognition. Our empirical
results show power-law generalization error scaling across a breadth of factors,
resulting in power-law exponents—the "steepness" of the learning curve—yet to
be explained by theoretical work. Further, model improvements only shift the
error but do not appear to affect the power-law exponent. We also show that model
size scales sublinearly with data size. These scaling relationships have signiﬁcant
implications on deep learning research, practice, and systems. They can assist
model debugging, setting accuracy targets, and decisions about data set growth.
They can also guide computing system design and underscore the importance of
continued computational scaling.
1
INTRODUCTION
The deep learning (DL) community has created impactful advances across diverse application do-
mains by following a straightforward recipe: search for improved model architectures, create large
training data sets, and scale computation. This recipe helps improve user experience and product
adoption, which drives increased DL development investments in existing and emerging application
domains. As data sets grow and new application domains proliferate, we would like to focus our
development efforts through a deeper understanding of how the recipe parts coordinate to drive the
most valuable product improvements.
Breaking down the recipe, we note challenges in the search for improved model architectures. Model
search can create important new insights and publications, which, in turn, improve products that
use the novel models. However, model architecture advances often depend on unreliable epiphany;
advances usually involve complex or creative reframing of the modeling problem, and research often
involves large-scale hyperparameter search with some serendipity.
As a lower-risk complement to model architecture search, it is important that we investigate the
other two recipe parts—creating large training sets and scaling computation—where we may have
more control over progress. It is widely believed that simply using more data to train larger models
should improve accuracy. We would like to better analyze the relationships between training set
scale, computational scale, and model accuracy improvements. In particular, accurately predicting
generalization error scaling with training set size would provide a powerful tool for estimating the
costs—in data and compute requirements—for advancing state-of-the-art (SOTA).
1
arXiv:1712.00409v1  [cs.LG]  1 Dec 2017

Although prior works analyze sample complexity requirements to reach a desired generalization
error, they appear insufﬁcient to accurately predict error scaling for real applications. Many studies
theoretically predict that generalization error "learning curves" take a power-law form, ε(m) ∝
αmβg. Here, ε is generalization error, m is the number of samples in the training set, α is a constant
property of the problem, and βg = −0.5 or −1 is the scaling exponent that deﬁnes the steepness
of the learning curve—how quickly a model family can learn from adding more training samples1.
Unfortunately, in real applications, we ﬁnd empirically that βg usually settles between −0.07 and
−0.35, exponents that are unexplained by prior theoretical work.
This paper presents the largest scale empirical characterization of learning curves to date that reveals
broadly that DL generalization error does show power-law improvement, but with exponents that
must be predicted empirically. We introduce a methodology to accurately predict generalization
error and model size scaling with increased training set size. We use this methodology to estimate
scaling relationships for six deep neural network models across four application domains: machine
translation, language modeling, image classiﬁcation, and speech recognition.
Our results show that power-law learning curves exist across all tested domains. Although different
applications yield different power-law exponents and intercepts, these learning curves exist across a
broad range of models, optimizers, regularizers, and loss functions. Improved model architectures
and optimizers can improve the power-law intercept, but not the exponent; models for a single
domain show the same learning curve steepness. Finally, we ﬁnd that models transition from a small
training set region dominated by best guessing to a region dominated by power-law scaling. With
sufﬁciently large training sets, models will saturate in a region dominated by irreducible error (e.g.,
Bayes error).
Further, we describe the signiﬁcant implications of predictable accuracy and model size scaling.
For DL practitioners and researchers, learning curves can assist model debugging and predict the
accuracy targets for improved model architectures. Our results suggest an opportunity for redou-
bled effort to theoretically predict or interpret learning curve exponents. Operationally, predictable
learning curves can guide decision-making about whether or how to grow data sets. Finally, learning
and model size curves can be used to guide system design and expansion, and they underscore the
importance of continued computational scaling.
This paper is organized as follows: We begin with a review of related work measuring relationships
between data set size, model size, and model capacity in Section 2. Section 3 describes our method-
ology to establish such relationships for four machine learning domains, and Section 4 shows those
relationships for the four domains. Section 5 discusses some implications of our scaling results.
2
RELATED WORK
Since our objective is to accurately predict generalization error and model size scaling with in-
creased training set size, we start with a review of prior theoretical and empirical work to see if they
are adequate to predict the behavior we see. Prior work investigates generalization error improve-
ments as sample complexity increases using three approaches: theoretically bounding generalization
error scaling, theoretically estimating the expected generalization error, and empirically collecting
generalization error for single applications. Prior work also deeply analyzes the theoretical model
capacity, suggesting the model size required to ﬁt training data.
Unfortunately, although these prior works offer general guidance, they are not able to explain our
empirical results. To the best of our knowledge, this paper is the ﬁrst to empirically characterize
learning curve and model size scaling trends for a broad range of application domains and models.
2.1
GENERALIZATION ERROR SCALING WITH DATA: LEARNING CURVES
We start with a survey of studies that investigate learning curves. Most of these works show power-
law generalization error scaling (ε(m) ∼αmβg) with exponent βg = −0.5 or −1.
1Note: learning curves measure how much training data a model family requires to reach a particular
accuracy. They are different from training and validation curves, which measure number of training iterations
a model needs to learn a particular data set.
2

Bounding Generalization Error: Many prior works provide theoretical bounds on the sample
complexity to ensure particular generalization error. Early theoretical work deﬁnes a framework
for bounding generalization, but makes weak assumptions that cause the predicted generalization
error to be very loose (Haussler (1988)). Early follow-on research tightens the bounds by relating
sample complexity to generalization error through the Vapnik-Chervonenkis (VC) dimension of the
target concept class (Ehrenfeucht et al. (1989); Blumer et al. (1989); Haussler et al. (1996)). All of
these bounds show power-law relationships under certain assumptions, such as the hypothesis space
must contain at least one model that can correctly ﬁt the data or the training data size must be much
larger than the capacity of the models. These assumptions are often too strict for real applications,
so the bounds are usually loose or even vacuous. Recent work by Dziugaite and Roy (2017) tightens
bounds for the common real application setting that model size is larger than the number of samples
in the data set. However, despite the breadth of prior sample complexity bounds, we have yet to ﬁnd
straightforward bounds that explain our empirical results.
Estimating Expected Generalization Error: Prior work also evaluates the expected generalization
error in certain contexts. Using statistical mechanics approaches, Amari et al. (1992) and Amari
(1993) show that as sample complexity grows, generalization error should decline as a power-law
ε(m) ∼αmβg with βg = −0.5, −1, or −2. These trends depend on assumptions about the problem
and give the expectation across all possible data distributions. Amari and others show that similar
expectations hold for certain models, such as single- and multi-layer perceptrons, and committees
of networks (Györgyi and Tishby (1990); Seung et al. (1992); Schwarze and Hertz (1993); Amari
and Murata (1993)). Appendix B adds to this corpus, showing that a counting model used to predict
the probability of a weighted coin-ﬂip converges with the power-law exponent of βg = −0.5.
Despite the breadth of prior work estimating the expected generalization error in various contexts,
the empirical results in this paper show yet unexplained power-law exponents between βg = −0.07
and −0.35 on various real world problems. Our results suggest an opportunity for redoubled effort
to theoretically justify our empirical generalization scaling trends.
Empirical Generalization Error Scaling: A few prior studies empirically investigate the way gen-
eralization error scales with training data size. Using a methodology similar to the one we propose
below, Banko and Brill (2001) test a language modeling problem (confusion set disambiguation)
trained using subsets of a billion-word corpus of text. Their results appear to show power-law scal-
ing of the average disambiguation validation error. In speech recognition, Amodei et al. (2016) show
word error rate improvement for a Deep Speech 2 model on varying sizes of training data. They use
a ﬁxed model size of 68M parameters and show power-law WER gains from increased data. Sun
et al. (2017) show image classiﬁcation accuracy improves with training data size, but curiously, they
conclude that accuracy "increases logarithmically based on volume of training data size".
Although some prior works study generalization error scaling trends empirically, the community has
yet to deﬁnitively conclude that power-law error scaling should exist across most DL domains.
2.2
MODEL CAPACITY REQUIRED TO FIT DATA
Prior studies propose various measures of model capacity based on a model’s organization and
parameterization, and these measures hint at the model size required to ﬁt a training set. We expect
that number of model parameters to ﬁt a data set should follow s(m) ∝αmβp, where s(m) is the
required model size to ﬁt a training set of size m, and βp ∈[0.5, 1].
Vapnik and Chervonenkis deﬁned the VC dimension of a model as the cardinality of the largest
set of data points that a model can shatter (Vapnik (1998)). Follow-on work uses data complexity
measures to estimate the structure of model families that might ﬁt the data (Bartlett and Mendelson
(2002)). Recent work also deﬁnes bounds on the VC dimension of particular deep neural network
models, including showing that recurrent neural network models have the same effective capacity if
the optimization scheme is well-tuned and training runs long enough (Harvey et al. (2017); Dziugaite
and Roy (2017); Collins et al. (2017)).
Prior work to empirically estimate model scaling with training set size is very sparse. The Banko
and Brill (2001) confusion set disambiguation work claims that the model size required to ﬁt the
data grows "log-linearly". We estimate that their Winnow and memory-based models grow with the
same power-law exponent to larger data sets, βp ≈0.72.
3

While these theoretical and empirical results offer signiﬁcant insight about required model sizing,
recent work has noted the need for more practical guidance (Zhang et al. (2017); Arpit et al. (2017);
Smith and Le (2017); Kawaguchi et al. (2017)). These studies show that while model capacity might
explain a model’s ability to memorize training examples, capacity may not adequately explain the
model’s ability to generalize to new examples. Rather than reason through these complexities, it is
currently easier for researchers and practitioners to over-parameterize models to ﬁt training data.
3
MEASURING MODEL ACCURACY AND SIZE SCALING WITH TRAINING
DATA SIZE
With the general guidance from prior work in mind, we focus our attention on accurately estimating
learning curves and model size scaling trends. We measure the effects of scaling data size on gen-
eralization error and model size using the following methodology. The general process is to select
state-of-the-art (SOTA) models and to train "hyperparameter-reduced" versions of these models on
successively larger subsets (shards) of a training set to see how the accuracy of the model grows
with training set size.
First, for each of the machine learning domains, we survey recent work to ﬁnd the model architec-
tures that show SOTA generalization error on a large data set. Here, a "large data set" is a training
set that could be reduced in size by 2-3 orders of magnitude and still be signiﬁcant enough to per-
form valuable model architecture studies. We select more than one model architecture for some ML
domains to compare their scaling behaviors.
Data sets: Given a SOTA model architecture, M, and a training set, T, we set up experimental
infrastructure as follows. First, we ensure that T is randomly shufﬂed to maximize the likelihood
that shards of T will have similar data distribution to T. We then subdivide T into shard sizes
that span 2-3 orders of magnitude in steps of roughly 2× (e.g., T0 is 0.1% of T, T1 is 0.2%, T2 is
0.4%, etc.). We deﬁne a single validation set, V , which is used to score all models (even trained on
different shard sizes of T), such that ∀i, V ∩Ti = ∅. V must be sufﬁciently large to approximate
true generalization error with low variance. We use either the validation set available with training
data, or if such a validation set is not available, we use a hold-out subset of T that does not overlap
with any of the T shards.
We ensure that the metric used to measure the size of the data set accurately represents the observable
size of the training set. For example, character language models truncate time-series input sequences
at a maximum length and discard the rest of the sequence from the training set. In such situations,
the data set size must only count the portion of the input sequences observed by the model during a
full training run.
Model setup: We ﬁrst replicate the SOTA results on T, setting hyperparameters of M as described
in the corresponding prior works. Next, we aim to understand the importance of model capacity
to ﬁt a training set, so we control our experiments by removing regularization schemes that might
reduce the model’s effective capacity (e.g., weight decay). With this simpliﬁcation, we can inspect
validation curves to ﬁnd the smallest model size that is able to overﬁt each shard size of T. For
models that achieve SOTA results while underﬁtting on their training set, we reduce the the training
set size to a scale that the model can overﬁt.
We aim to ﬁnd a model variant of M that best ﬁts V when trained on the smallest shard, T0, and
to ﬁnd this variant, we reduce hyperparameters of M and perform a grid search. We generate
a set of model candidates, M0 = {M0;0, M0;1, M0;2, . . .}, by constraining M’s model capacity,
changing hyperparameters such as layer count, hidden node count, etc. From this search, we ﬁnd
ˆ
M0 = arg minM0;j∈M0 (L(M0;j, V )), which gives the best validation loss, L, on V when trained
on T0.
Training procedure: Finally, with best-ﬁt models deﬁned for the smallest and largest shards of T,
we perform a stochastic Monte Carlo grid search to ﬁnd the best-ﬁt hyperparameter-reduced models
as we step through successively larger shards of T. Speciﬁcally, given the best-ﬁt model size for
shard Ti, we project forward to shard Ti+1—often increasing model sizes linearly or sublinearly in
the shard size—to deﬁne the candidate set of models {Mi+1;0, Mi+1;1, Mi+1;2, . . .}. We train these
models in search of the models that best ﬁt the validation set. In most cases, we also search over
4

optimization parameters such as batch sizes and learning rates, and sometimes re-run training with
different random seeds to aid the search.
We report validation losses that are sums or unweighted averages over distance metrics measuring
the error per model-predicted output. This loss structure appears important to the predictivity of the
resulting learning curves. Depending on problem domain, error metrics include cross-entropy, Lp
norms, and classiﬁcation error. In many cases, training optimizes a different loss function than we
report as the validation loss (see Appendix A for more details).
4
DATA SET AND MODEL SIZE SCALING RELATIONSHIPS
In this section, we present empirical results showing how increasing training data size results in
power-law scaling of generalization error and required model size to ﬁt the training set for four
domains: machine translation, language modeling, image classiﬁcation, and speech recognition2.
These power-law relationships hold for each ML domain and across various model architectures,
optimizers, and loss metrics. In many cases, we also ﬁnd that model size growth with data set
size grows sublinearly. Throughout this section, we speciﬁcally refer to power-law exponents for
generalization error (−0.5 ≤βg < 0 in ε(Ti) = α|Ti|βg) and number of model parameters (0.5 ≤
βp < 1.0 in model size = α|Ti|βp).
4.1
NEURAL MACHINE TRANSLATION
We start our learning curve investigation with a case study in neural machine translation (NMT).
Translation converts text input in one natural language to output text in another language. Relative
to other DL domains, NMT has low-dimensional input and output spaces, and can be trained with
large labeled data sets. Our results show learning curve character similar to theoretical predictions,
though the power-law exponents are smaller (i.e., βg ≈−0.128 rather than −0.5).
To test NMT, we train a SOTA sequence-to-sequence model with global attention (Luong et al.
(2015)) on the 2016 Conference on Machine Translation (WMT’16) German-to-English data set.
We use a publicly available implementation of this architecture in OpenNMT (Klein et al. (2017)).
The encoder contains two layers of bidirectional LSTMs, and the decoder contains the attention
layer and stack of LSTM layers. To simplify training this SOTA model, we remove ensembling and
data augmentation techniques (Sennrich et al. (2016b)).
To scale model sizes, we tie LSTM input and hidden state sizes together, and change them so that
the total parameter count decreases roughly linearly with data set size. We use Adam to optimize
per-sequence cross-entropy loss and report the per-token classiﬁcation error. We select models using
the newstest2015 validation set, and we use the other newstest development sets from 2009 to 2013
for evaluation. Results presented here are with dropout rate of 0.2, though we tested without dropout
and found similar learning curve exponents.
We clean and tokenize the data set using Moses (Koehn et al. (2007)) as described by Luong et al.
(2017). We use the byte-pair encoding (BPE) method described by Sennrich et al. (2016a) to build
a shared word-piece vocabulary between English and German. After preprocessing, the training
set includes 4.5 million training sequences with roughly 130 million tokens in each language. We
uniformly randomly shufﬂe the training data and sample training shards as described in Section 3.
In our initial tests, we aim to replicate theoretical results as closely as possible. Prior theoretical
work indicates that the expected classiﬁcation error learning curve for a single model family (i.e., of
ﬁxed capacity) is a power-law with exponent βg = −0.5 (Amari et al. (1992)). Further, prior work
predicts that as a model runs out of capacity on larger data sets, the error should plateau, resulting
in a power-law + constant, ε(m) ∼αmβg + γ, where γ is the error when the model family has
exhausted its capacity.
Indeed, we ﬁnd that learning curves for a single model family can be closely represented by a
power-law + constant. However, we ﬁnd that βg is smaller in magnitude than −0.5. We start by
training ﬁxed size models on each of the training shards. The left plot in Figure 1 shows the learning
curves for two different model sizes with 208 or 512 hidden nodes per LSTM layer (17M and 48M
2Data presented here was collected from roughly 50 years worth of GPU time.
5

222
220
221
223
224
225
226
227
Training Data Set Size, Number of Tokens (Log-scale)
0.41
0.44
0.48
0.51
0.54
0.58
0.62
0.67
Minimum Test Loss (Log-scale)
208 Hidden
512 Hidden
208 Hidden Trend
512 Hidden Trend
ε208(m) = 41.2 m-0.36 + 0.39
ε512(m) = 21.5 m-0.30 + 0.32
219
220
221
222
223
224
225
226
227
Training Data Set Size, Number of Tokens (Log-scale)
0.36
0.39
0.42
0.46
0.50
0.55
0.60
0.65
0.71
Minimum Test Loss (Log-scale)
Token Error Rate
Token Error Rate Trend
ε(m) = 3.87 m-0.13
Figure 1: Neural machine translation learning curves. Left: the learning curves for separate models
follow ε(m) = αmβg + γ. Right: composite learning curve of best-ﬁt model at each data set size.
parameters, respectively). Learning curves with βg = −0.360 and −0.300, respectively, ﬁt the
empirical results with less than 0.6% relative root mean square error.
For these experiments, we use controls as close to theoretical assumptions as possible. We use the
same loss function, classiﬁcation error. To approximate the generalization error expectation calcu-
lations without an excessive number of training runs, we select models using the median minimum
validation error across multiple training runs with separate random seeds. We cannot control for
factors such as the assumed data distribution or ensure that the model family contains a model that
can correctly represent the data generating function. These factors might account for a portion of
the gap from theoretical to empirical βg.
Unlike these initial tests, DL practitioners and researchers often grow model sizes as training data
grows to ensure sufﬁcient capacity. They would rather see a composite learning curve representing
the best-ﬁt model at each training set size. The right plot in Figure 1 shows the composite learning
curve for NMT. The best-ﬁt results form a longer power-law region. We ﬁnd that βg is even smaller
than the single-model learning curves; if we project forward, βg would be approximately −0.128.
The rest of our results aim to characterize the steepness of these composite best-ﬁt learning curves.
We also note that as training set sizes grow, optimization becomes more difﬁcult and models run
out of capacity, so the empirical error tends away from the power-law trend. This divergence is
common across domains, as we show below, and we would need to perform a more exhaustive
hyperparameter search to ﬁnd results closer to the existing power-law.
4.2
LANGUAGE MODELING
Language models (LMs) aim to predict probability distributions for the next character, word, or
other textual grams conditioned on a previous sequence of input text. LMs are very important model
features for domains such as speech recognition and machine translation, helping to identify most
probable sequences of grams. Similar to NMT, LMs have low-dimensional input and output spaces,
and can be trained with very large labeled sets.
LM learning curves and model size scaling relationships are the most robust; word and character lan-
guage models show clear and predictable power-law learning curves, and the power-law exponents
tend to be small (βg ∈[−0.09, −0.06]). These small exponents indicate that current language mod-
els will require signiﬁcantly more data to signiﬁcantly improve accuracy. The word and character
models that give the best generalization error grow sublinearly in the training set size (βp ≈0.7).
4.2.1
WORD LANGUAGE MODELS
We train LSTM-based word LMs that were early SOTA models as described in Jozefowicz et al.
(2016) with some small changes. To reduce the computational requirements of the models, we
6

220
221
222
223
224
225
226
227
228
Training Data Set Size, Millions of Words (Log-scale)
3.39
3.73
4.12
4.54
5.00
Minimum Validation Loss (Log-scale)
2-Layer LSTMs
4-Layer LSTMs
Depth-5 RHNs
2-Layer LSTMs Trend
4-Layer LSTMs Trend
Depth-5 RHNs Trend
ε(m) = 11.9 m-0.066
ε(m) = 12.0 m-0.066
ε(m) = 11.7 m-0.065
220
221
222
223
224
225
226
227
228
Training Data Set Size, Millions of Words (Log-scale)
1.0
1.9
3.6
7.0
13
25
49
93
177
Model Num Params, Millions (Log-scale)
s(m) = 2.12e-4 m0.68
s(m) = 5.08e-5 m0.781
2-Layer LSTMs
4-Layer LSTMs
Depth-5 RHNs
2-Layer LSTMs Trend
4-Layer LSTMs Trend
Depth-5 RHNs Trend
s(m) = 8.08e-5 m0.70
Figure 2: Learning curve and model size results and trends for word language models.
restrict the vocabulary to the top 10,000 most frequent words in the Billion Word Dataset (Chelba
et al. (2013)). The networks are 2- or 4-layer LSTMs with the same number of hidden weights in
each layer, and we scale the number of layer weights to modulate the model size and ﬁnd the best ﬁt
model for each training shard size. We also compare LSTMs against Recurrent Highway Networks
(RHNs) described in Zilly et al. (2017). Speciﬁcally, we train single-layer, depth 5 RHNs to see if the
different network organizations show different generalization trends. We use a stochastic gradient
descent optimizer (SGD) with per-sequence cross-entropy loss, and we report per-predicted-word
average cross-entropy loss. We do not use dropout. We train the models on shards ranging from
0.1% up to 40% of the Billion Word Dataset.
Figure 2 shows the learning curve and model size results for LSTM and RHN word language models.
First, the loss scaling relationships are smooth power-law functions of the data set size with almost
exactly the same exponents: βg = −0.0656 ± 1%. Again, larger models have more difﬁculty
optimizing to ﬁt the larger training sets. For word LMs, we invest more in batch size and learning
rate tuning to ﬁnd the best model on these larger training shards. The tuned models settle at or just
above the power-law trend, suggesting that further hyperparameter search is likely to yield a model
on the trend.
Strikingly, although these model architectures differ appreciably, they all show the same learning
curve proﬁle characterized by the power-law exponent. Increasing the LSTMs depth from 2 to
4 layers decreases the networks’ accuracy by about 1.5%, but both model architectures see the
same relative loss improvement as we increase training set size. RHNs have signiﬁcantly different
recurrence structure than LSTMs, but show nearly identical learning curves.
Model size results show that best-ﬁt models grow sublinearly in the training shard size. Speciﬁcally,
the best-ﬁt 2-layer LSTM and depth-5 RHNs model sizes grow roughly with βp = 0.69 ± 5%. The
4-layer LSTMs show slightly worse scaling with βp = 0.78, suggesting they make less effective use
of extra parameters on larger data sets. Despite the model size scaling differences, for a given model
architecture, we can accurately predict the model size that will best ﬁt increasingly larger data sets.
4.2.2
CHARACTER LANGUAGE MODELS
To test character-level language modeling, we train RHNs of depth 10, which we found to achieve
SOTA accuracy on the Billion Word data set. We scale the number of layer weights to modulate
the model size and ﬁnd the best ﬁt model for each training shard size. We use SGD, optimizing for
per-predicted-character cross-entropy loss, which we report on the validation set. We also compare
SGD against the Adam optimizer to test their effects. The input and output vocabulary includes all
alphanumeric characters and common symbols for total size 98. We train the models on shards of
0.01% up to 4% of the Billion Word data set.
Results for character LMs appear substantially similar to word LMs. Figure 3 plots the generaliza-
tion and model size scaling results for character LMs. As with word LMs, generalization improves
7

219
221
223
225
227
Training Data Set Size, Number of Chars (Log-scale)
ε(m) = 5.37 m-0.094
0.86
0.93
1.00
1.08
1.17
1.26
1.36
1.47
1.59
Minimum Validation Loss (Log-scale)
Depth-10 RHNs, SGD
Depth-10 RHNs, Adam
Depth-10 RHNs, SGD Trend
Depth-10 RHNs, Adam Trend
ε(m) = 5.25 m-0.095
219
221
223
225
227
Training Data Set Size, Number of Chars (Log-scale)
0.1
0.4
1.0
2.6
6.9
18.2
47.8
125.8
330.9
Model Num Params, Millions (Log-scale)
Depth-10 RHNs, SGD
Depth-10 RHNs, Adam
Depth-10 RHNs, SGD Trend
Depth-10 RHNs, Adam Trend
Figure 3: Learning curve and model size results and trends for character language models.
on a power-law as training data size increases, though the exponent is βg = −0.0936 for the SGD
optimizer and βg = −0.0954 for the Adam optimizer. These power-law exponents are very similar
despite the signiﬁcant optimizer differences—Adam appears to just shift the learning curve down by
∼5% relative.
Like word LMs, character LMs also learn signiﬁcantly more slowly than predicted by theoretical
results. Though word and character LMs have some major differences, their learning curve expo-
nent differences indicate that character LMs are able to learn relationships between characters with
successively fewer samples than word LMs are able to learn relationships between words.
Character LMs also show sublinear model size growth as data set size increases. Speciﬁcally, βp =
0.78 for SGD optimized models and βp = 0.92 for Adam optimized. Character LMs with the
SGD optimizer see similar improvements from increased model size as word LMs, while the Adam
optimized models see poorer scaling and require signiﬁcantly more parameters (∼8–11×). Still,
their learning and model size curves appear predictable.
4.3
IMAGE CLASSIFICATION
As a comparison to our machine translation and language modeling results—where inputs and out-
puts are low-dimensional time-series data—we next test image classiﬁcation, a machine learning
domain that aims to identify objects in high-dimensional image data. Image classiﬁcation is used in
applications such as object recognition, image captioning, and tagging video content. Image classi-
ﬁcation also shows power-law learning curves and model size scaling relationships. We also show
that accuracy plateaus near random guessing on very small training sets.
We test ResNets (He et al. (2016)), which were recently the SOTA architectures for ImageNet clas-
siﬁcation (Russakovsky et al. (2015)). ResNets are deep networks built from blocks containing
convolutions, nonlinearities, and pooling layers. They have residual connections from the inputs
to outputs of most blocks that permit the network to bypass layers. We train and validate ResNets
on various shard sizes of ImageNet, ranging from 1 image per class (0.08% of images) up to 800
images per class (62%). ImageNet has 1,000 different object classes as outputs.
We start with 5 known variants of ResNets with depths 18, 34, 50, 101, and 152 layers. We ﬁrst scale
the model sizes by changing the number of layers ranging from 10 to 200. To provide even ﬁner-
grained model size control, we also change the number of convolution ﬁlters using a scaling factor.
We scale ﬁlter counts proportionally across all convolution blocks with scaling factors 0.0625 to 1.5.
We test models with parameter counts ranging from 89K to 121M. We use a Nesterov Momentum
optimizer targeting classiﬁcation cross-entropy loss. We remove weight regularization.
Figure 4 shows that various loss calculations follow the power-law learning curves. We report aver-
age validation cross-entropy, top-1, and top-5 classiﬁcation errors. For small training sets—less than
roughly 25 images per class—these error metrics are roughly equal to the model random guessing
(i.e., greater than −log(1/1, 000) ≈6.9 for cross-entropy, and near 1 −(1/1, 000) = 99.9% clas-
8

21
23
25
27
29
Training Data Set Size, Images per Class (Log-scale)
0.09
0.16
0.29
0.54
1.00
1.85
3.42
6.33
11.71
Minimum Validation Loss (Log-scale)
Xentropy
Top-1
Top-5
Xentropy Trend
Top-1 Trend
Top-5 Trend
εxentropy(m) = 14.0 m-0.35
εtop-1(m) = 2.24 m-0.31
εtop-5(m) = 3.29 m-0.52
21
23
25
27
29
Training Data Set Size, Images per Class (Log-scale)
2.6
4.2
6.7
10.8
17.4
28.0
45.1
72.7
117.0
Model Num Params, Millions (Log-scale)
ResNets
ResNets Trend
s(m) = 2.76 m0.57
Figure 4: Learning curve and model size results and trends for ResNet image classiﬁcation.
siﬁcation error for top-1 and top-5). Models are unable to extract enough information from these
small training sets to make many accurate classiﬁcations on the validation set. We later describe this
as the "small data region".
As long as the training set is large enough, we observe that generalization improves on a power-law,
but the power-law exponent is different for each of the reported metrics. The top-1 classiﬁcation
error exponent is βg = −0.309. On the other hand, the exponent for top-5 classiﬁcation error is
βg = −0.488. Since top-5 classiﬁcation is a superset of top-1 classiﬁcation, the top-5 error should
improve at least as quickly as top-1, but in fact, the top-5 error improves signiﬁcantly more quickly
as training data size increases. The validation cross-entropy exponent is βg = −0.35, but the metric
has different range than classiﬁcation error, so we cannot directly compare their exponents.
Finally, Figure 4 also shows that model size growth is again predictable. The best-ﬁt ResNet models
grow following a sublinear curve with exponent βp = 0.573. This exponent indicates that they grow
more slowly than models in other domains we have tested. However, even on the smallest data sets,
ResNets require fairly large models to ﬁt data well, at least 3.4M parameters.
4.4
SPEECH RECOGNITION
Speech recognition techniques convert acoustic speech signals into text or commands. Speech recog-
nition is used in diverse applications such as voice-powered machine controls and conversational
user interfaces. Recent research has shifted from hand-engineered speech recognition pipelines
over to end-to-end deep learning based methods that show promising results (Hannun et al. (2014);
Chorowski et al. (2015); Amodei et al. (2016)). Speech recognition provides an interesting contrast
to prior domains; speech input data is medium-dimensionality time-series data.
To test trends in speech recognition, we train two recent SOTA models: Deep Speech 2 (DS2) and an
attention-based model. The DS2 model (Amodei et al. (2016)) consists of two 2D convolution layers
followed by four bidirectional LSTM recurrent layers. We use Adam to optimize connectionist
temporal classiﬁcation loss (CTC, Graves et al. (2006)). We compare DS2 against a hybrid attention
model similar to those described by Battenberg et al. (2017). The model has an encoder comprised
of three bidirectional LSTM layers with two intermediate max-pooling layers, and a hybrid attention
decoder. We use Adam to optimize output sequence average cross-entropy loss. For both models,
we remove regularization (weight decay and noise) to observe underﬁtting or overﬁtting models.
The inputs to these models are a sequence of log-spectrograms of power normalized audio clips,
calculated on 20 ms windows. Outputs are the English alphabet along with the blank symbol. We do
not include language models for output sequence beam search, and we report per-predicted-output
character error rate on the validation set. We train on shards of labeled data set comprising 11,940
hours of speech containing 8 million utterances Amodei et al. (2016).
To vary the number of parameters in both the DS2 and attention models, we vary the number of
weights in all LSTM layers, so that separate layers have the same number of weights. In the attention
9

8
16
32
64
128
256
512
1024
2048
Training Data Set Size, Hours of Audio (Log-scale)
0.11
0.14
0.18
0.23
0.29
0.37
0.48
0.61
0.78
Minimum Validation Loss (Log-scale)
DS2
Attention
DS2 Trend
Attention Trend
ε(m) = 1.36 m-0.30
ε(m) = 0.95 m-0.30
8
16
32
64
128
256
512
1024
2048
Training Data Set Size, Hours of Audio (Log-scale)
0.10
0.13
0.16
0.19
0.23
0.29
0.36
0.44
0.54
Minimum Validation Loss (Log-scale)
1.7M
6M
87M
Best-fit
Best-fit Trend
Figure 5: Learning curves for DS2 and attention speech models (left), and learning curves for various
DS2 model sizes, 1.7M to 87M parameters (right).
model, we also proportionally scale number of weights in the attention LSTM and decoder cells. For
the DS2 model, model sizes range between 300K to 193M parameters, and for the attention based
models, sizes range from 95K to 156M parameters.
Figure 5 (left) shows that both DS2 and attention based speech models experience the same power-
law learning curve improvements. Although these models have signiﬁcantly different encoders and
decoders, they see the same relative improvements in character error rate as training set size increases
with βg = −0.299 ± 0.7%. Consistent with prior work (Bahdanau et al. (2016); Battenberg et al.
(2017)), larger attention models trained on larger data sets tend to be easier to optimize than DS2
models, whose generalization error tends away from the power-law trend on larger data sets.
For speech recognition, we trained a coarser spectra of model sizes, so model size scaling results for
each training data size are not as meaningful as with LMs or image classiﬁcation. Instead, we break
down learning curves a bit by showing the curves for three different DS2 model sizes, 1.7M to 87M
parameters (right side of Figure 5). These curves show similar trends to those in other domains: As
data size increases, most models experience power-law generalization improvements until the data
size approaches their effective capacity. In this case, the 1.7M parameter model’s accuracy plateaus
starting at around 170 hours of audio, and the 6M parameter model plateaus around 860 hours of
audio (i.e., roughly 5× more, which is similar to the difference in model size). Larger models (e.g.,
87M parameters) show generalization error close to the best-ﬁt trend up to larger data set sizes.
5
IMPLICATIONS OF GENERALIZATION ERROR AND MODEL SIZE SCALING
Predictable learning curves and model size scaling indicate some signiﬁcant implications on how
DL could proceed. For machine learning practitioners and researchers, predictable scaling can aid
model and optimization debugging and iteration time, and offer a way to estimate the most impactful
next steps to improve model accuracy. Operationally, predictable curves can guide decision-making
about whether or how to grow data sets or computation. Finally, these curves can be used to estimate
compute requirements and guide system design and expansion. They underscore the importance of
continued computational scaling.
5.1
THE LEARNING CURVES OF REAL APPLICATIONS
We start with a summary of the character of real application learning curves. Figure 6 shows a
cartoon sketch power-law plot that breaks down learning curve phases for real applications. The
curve begins in the small data region, where models will struggle to learn from a small number of
training samples. Here, models can only perform as well as "best" or "random" guessing.
The middle portion of learning curves is the power-law region, where each new training sample
provides information that helps models improve predictions on previously unseen samples. The
10

Training Data Set Size (Log-scale)
Generalization Error (Log-scale)
Power-law Region
Irreducible
Error
Region
Small Data
Region
Irreducible Error
Best Guess Error
Figure 6: Sketch of power-law learning curves
power-law exponent deﬁnes the steepness of this curve, or the slope when viewed on a log-log scale.
It is an indicator of the difﬁculty for models to represent the data generating function. Results in this
paper indicate that the power-law exponent is unlikely to be easily predicted with prior theory and
probably dependent on aspects of the problem domain or data distribution.
Finally, for most real world applications, there is likely to be a non-zero lower-bound error past
which models will be unable to improve. This lower bound includes Bayes error—the information
theoretic lower bound based on the data generating function—and a combination of other factors
that cause imperfect generalization. For instance, mislabeled samples in the training or validation
data sets are likely to cause irreducible error. We call this the irreducible error region. Although
we have yet to reach the irreducible error region for real applications in this study, we have tested
that this lower bound exists for toy problems.
5.2
IMPLICATIONS FOR DL PRACTITIONERS AND RESEARCHERS
Our results indicate that in many real world contexts, simply scaling your training data set and
models is likely to predictably improve the model’s accuracy. This predictable behavior may help
practitioners and researchers approach debugging and target better accuracy scaling.
Debugging DL Training: The empirical learning curves that we collect show robust power-law
regions. Surprisingly, we see a power-law region across all of our tests, which cover different prob-
lem domains, model architecture features, optimizers, and optimization functions. Table 1 in Ap-
pendix A shows the breadth of architectural and optimization features in our tests.
Given the robustness of the power-law learning curve character, we suggest that DL practitioners
and researchers consider this methodology for debugging data, model architecture, or optimization
issues. Divergence from power-law-like improvements is likely to indicate deeper challenges with
improving accuracy. For instance, when word and character language models began to diverge from
power-law scaling for the 10% and 2% of the Billion Word benchmark, respectively, we saw this
divergence as a cue to more exhaustively test hyperparameters. We found that larger training sets and
larger models become harder to optimize. For large models with ﬁxed hyperparameters, increasing
the batch sizes and learning rates usually closed a signiﬁcant portion of the gap to the power-law
trend. Analogously, smaller training sets often require smaller batch sizes to ensure models behave
well while ﬁtting. We expect that other model debugging, such as ﬁnding good model priors or
initialization, can also beneﬁt from this methodology.
Beating the Power-law: Machine learning researchers often try to improve model accuracy by
changing model architectures trained on a given data set. Their efforts can involve complex trial-and-
error and rely on creativity or epiphany to improve results. Our tests suggest that model architecture
improvements such as model depth only shift learning curves down, but might not improve the
power-law exponent.
11

A broader question is whether machine learning techniques could improve the power-law learning
curve exponent, or in other words, to improve generalization more quickly as training data grows.
Theory suggests that best case accuracy scaling is with βp = −0.5 or −1. Thus, for some problem
domains—especially language modeling—the potential accuracy improvements are immense if we
knew ways to improve the power-law exponent.
We have yet to ﬁnd factors that affect the power-law exponent. To beat the power-law as we increase
data set size, models would need to learn more concepts with successively less data. In other words,
models must successively extract more marginal information from each additional training sample.
This might be difﬁcult without adjustments to the data set. We suggest that future work more deeply
analyze learning curves when using data handling techniques, such as data ﬁltering/augmentation,
few-shot learning, experience replay, and generative adversarial networks.
5.3
OPERATIONAL IMPLICATIONS
Learning and model size curves can also guide decisions about data collection and scaling computa-
tion. As we project forward on learning curves, we can run into three types of scaling limits: training
data is too small, computation is too slow, or irreducible error.
Model Exploration using Small Data: It may seem counterintuitive, but an implication of pre-
dictable scaling is that model architecture exploration should be feasible with small training data
sets. Consider starting with a training set that is known to be large enough that current models show
accuracy in the power-law region of the learning curve. Since we expect model accuracy to improve
proportionally for different models, growing the training set and models is likely to result in the
same relative gains across the models.
The possibility of doing small data testing has signiﬁcant implications on manual and automatic
architecture search. Researchers or DL systems may be able to iterate on small data sets to ﬁnd
models that can accurately model the structure of the data distribution. Then, these models can be
scaled to larger data sets to ensure proportional accuracy gains.
Although small data set testing may be possible, it can be difﬁcult to ensure that training data is large
enough to see the power-law learning curve region. We have found that models with poor optimizer
parameterization or model priors/initialization show accuracy cliffs, where accuracy is only as good
as best guessing, but the model trains on enough data to be in the power-law region. Researchers
must take great care when deﬁning a "large enough" training set for small data testing. We leave the
methodology for deﬁning such a training set to future work.
Computational Limits: If we have identiﬁed a desirable model to scale to larger training sets, the
next potential limitation is the speed of computation. In some cases, training large models on very
large data sets would take months or years of critical path compute time, making these training
runs impractical for any real world problem on existing systems. However, predictable learning
and model size curves may offer a way to project the compute requirements to reach a particular
accuracy level. The compute requirements could inform decisions about how to scale computational
capacity to unlock these compute-limited applications.
After reviewing the tests performed for this work, we ﬁnd that we have run into compute limitations
for the largest data sets of each application domain. Most frequently, we run out of GPU memory
when trying to train the largest models on the largest data sets. In many cases, we could alleviate
these issues with techniques like data or model parallelism, though they would require signiﬁcant
software changes to reduce per-compute-unit memory requirements. Alternatively, we could migrate
training to systems with more memory. Further, our longest running training sessions have taken as
long as 6 weeks to converge. Parallelism and hardware improvements to reduce this time are highly
desirable.
Running into Irreducible Error: If we approach the irreducible error region in real applications,
improving accuracy will require techniques outside the straightforward recipe. As an example,
reaching Bayes error for a problem would be an indicator that no further information can be ex-
tracted from the existing data set—the application might be considered "solved". If further model
architecture search, training set growth, or computational scale cannot improve accuracy, it is likely
that models are achieving the irreducible error. To improve error beyond this irreducible level may
12

require techniques that could increase the information content of the data to distinguish between the
samples that contribute to the Bayes error.
It may be difﬁcult to assess whether we have reached irreducible error or if models just have inherent
bias that makes them unable to resolve more information from the data. One approach might be to
estimate the human error rate for the task. As long as humans are constrained to the same data for
the problem, their best-case accuracy may be a reasonable upper bound on the irreducible error. If
humans can perform better than current models, it is likely that models could be improved.
5.4
HARDWARE DESIGN IMPLICATIONS
Since predictable learning and model size curves can offer a way to project the compute requirements
required to reach a particular accuracy level, they can also help hardware developers predict the
needs of DL hardware users.
Deep Learning Hardware Design: First, there is a close tie from compute operation rate (e.g., ﬂoat-
ing point operations, or "FLOPs") to model accuracy improvements. Power-law learning curves and
model size growth indicate that each new hardware generation with improved FLOP rate can pro-
vide a predictable step function improvement in relative DL model accuracy. Further, the different
learning curve and model size growth exponents can act as an indicator of the computational scala-
bility of different application domains. Different application domains will see varying beneﬁts from
improved FLOP rates, which can help prioritize the domains that should be targets for improved
compute throughput.
Second, as new model architecture features emerge for DL applications, hardware designers can
estimate the importance of accelerating these new model features. Suppose the new model fea-
ture runs very slowly on current hardware, and as a result, throughput is not sufﬁcient for the new
model architecture to improve SOTA (e.g., a new non-linearity not supported by current ﬂoating
point function units). Implementing the new feature in hardware might be costly, and the resulting
performance improvements might not provide the required throughput to achieve necessary model
accuracy to improve the state-of-the-art. Hardware designers could estimate the throughput of a
hardware implementation and the resulting model accuracy gains to weigh them against the beneﬁts
of other hardware components.
The Performance-Accuracy Trade-off: Many DL software and hardware techniques impose a
trade-off between model accuracy and the speed of computation. Learning curves and model size
growth can indicate whether these techniques could regain lost accuracy by improving the speed of
computation. For example, low-precision computation/quantization and sparse models give up some
model accuracy (e.g., up to 20%) in order to improve compute throughput. If the compute throughput
improvements allow DL developers to train larger models on larger data sets, these accuracy losses
might be easily recoverable.
6
CONCLUSION
The deep learning (DL) community has created impactful advances across diverse application do-
mains by following a straightforward recipe: search for improved model architectures, create large
training data sets, and scale computation. While model architecture search can be unpredictable, the
model accuracy improvements from growing data set size and scaling computation are empirically
predictable. We empirically validate that DL model accuracy improves as a power-law as we grow
training sets for state-of-the-art (SOTA) model architectures in four machine learning domains: ma-
chine translation, language modeling, image processing, and speech recognition. These power-law
learning curves exists across all tested domains, model architectures, optimizers, and loss functions.
Further, within each domain, model architecture and optimizer changes only shift the learning curves
but do not affect the power-law exponent—the "steepness" of the learning curve. We also show that
model size scales sublinearly with data size. These scaling relationships have signiﬁcant research,
practice, and systems implications on deep learning progress.
13

REFERENCES
S. Amari. A Universal Theorem on Learning Curves. Neural Networks, 6:161–166, 1993.
S. Amari and N. Murata. Statistical Theory of Learning Curves under Entropic Loss Criterion. Neural Compu-
tation, 5(1):140–153, 1993.
S. Amari, N. Fujita, and S. Shinomoto. Four Types of Learning Curves. Neural Computation, 4(4):605–618,
1992.
D. Amodei, R. Anubhai, E. Battenberg, C. Case, J. Casper, B. Catanzaro, J. Chen, M. Chrzanowski, A. Coates,
G. Diamos, et al. Deep Speech 2: End-to-End Speech Recognition in English and Mandarin. In Proceedings
of The International Conference on Machine Learning (ICML), pages 173–182, 2016.
D. Arpit, S. Jastrz˛ebski, N. Ballas, D. Krueger, E. Bengio, M. S. Kanwal, T. Maharaj, A. Fischer, A. Courville,
Y. Bengio, and S. Lacoste-Julien. A Closer Look at Memorization in Deep Networks. In Proceedings of the
International Conference on Machine Learning, August 2017.
D. Bahdanau, J. Chorowski, D. Serdyuk, P. Brakel, and Y. Bengio. End-to-end Attention-based Large Vocabu-
lary Speech Recognition. arXiv preprint arXiv:1508.04395v2, 2016.
M. Banko and E. Brill. Scaling to Very Very Large Corpora for Natural Language Disambiguation. In Pro-
ceedings of Association of Computational Linguistics (ACL), January 2001.
P. L. Bartlett and S. Mendelson. Rademacher and Gaussian Complexities: Risk Bounds and Structural Results.
In Journal of Machine Learning Research 3, pages 463–482, November 2002.
E. Battenberg, J. Chen, R. Child, A. Coates, Y. Gaur, Y. Li, H. Liu, S. Satheesh, D. Seetapun, A. Sri-
ram, and Z. Zhu.
Exploring Neural Transducers for End-to-end Speech Recognition.
arXiv preprint
arXiv:1707.07413, 2017.
A. Blumer, A. Ehrenfeucht, D. Haussler, and M. K. Warmuth. Learnability and the Vapnik-Chervonenkis
Dimension. Journal of the ACM (JACM), 36(4):929–965, October 1989.
C. Chelba, T. Mikolov, M. Schuster, Q. Ge, T. Brants, P. Koehn, and T. Robinson. One Billion Word Benchmark
for Measuring Progress in Statistical Language Modeling. arXiv preprint arXiv:1312.3005, 2013.
J. K. Chorowski, D. Bahdanau, D. Serdyuk, K. Cho, and Y. Bengio.
Attention-based Models for Speech
Recognition. In Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems (NIPS), pages 577–585, 2015.
J. Collins, J. Sohl-Dickstein, and D. Sussillo. Capacity and Trainability in Recurrent Neural Networks. In
Proceedings of The International Conference on Learning Representations (ICLR), 2017.
G. K. Dziugaite and D. M. Roy. Computing Nonvacuous Generalization Bounds for Deep (Stochastic) Neural
Networks with Many More Parameters than Training Data. In Proceedings of The International Conference
on Machine Learning (ICML), 2017.
A. Ehrenfeucht, D. Haussler, M. Kearns, and L. Valiant. A General Lower Bound on the Number of Examples
Needed for Learning. Information and Computation, 82:247–261, 1989. Workshop on Computing Learning
Theory, 1988.
A. Graves, S. Fernández, F. Gomez, and J. Schmidhuber. Connectionist Temporal Classiﬁcation: Labelling Un-
segmented Sequence Data with Recurrent Neural Networks. In Proceedings of the International Conference
on Machine Learning (ICML), 2006.
G. Györgyi and N. Tishby. Statistical Theory of Learning a Rule. Neural Networks and Spin Glasses, pages
3–36, 1990.
A. Hannun, C. Case, J. Casper, B. Catanzaro, G. Diamos, E. Elsen, R. Prenger, S. Satheesh, S. Sengupta,
A. Coates, et al. Deep Speech: Scaling Up End-to-End Speech Recognition. arXiv preprint arXiv:1412.5567,
2014.
N. Harvey, C. Liaw, and A. Mehrabian.
Nearly-tight VC-dimension Bounds for Piecewise Linear Neural
Networks. In Proceedings of Machine Learning Research, volume 65, pages 1––12, 2017.
D. Haussler. Quantifying Inductive Bias: AI Learning Algorithms and Valiant’s Learning Framework. Artiﬁcial
Intelligence, 36(2):177–221, 1988.
D. Haussler, M. Kearns, H. S. Seung, and N. Tishby. Rigorous Learning Curve Bounds from Statistical Me-
chanics. Machine Learning, 25(2):195–236, November 1996.
14

K. He, X. Zhang, S. Ren, and J. Sun. Deep Residual Learning for Image Recognition. In Proceedings of the
IEEE Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition (CVPR), pages 770–778, June 2016.
R. Jozefowicz, O. Vinyals, M. Schuster, N. Shazeer, and Y. Wu. Exploring the Limits of Language Modeling.
arXiv preprint arXiv:1602.02410v2, 2016.
K. Kawaguchi, L. P. Kaelbling, and Y. Bengio.
Generalization in Deep Learning.
arXiv preprint
arXiv:1710.05468v1, October 2017.
G. Klein, Y. Kim, Y. Deng, J. Senellart, and A. M. Rush. Opennmt: Open-source toolkit for neural machine
translation. In Proceedings of the Association for Computational Linguistics (ACL), 2017.
P. Koehn, H. Hoang, A. Birch, C. Callison-Burch, M. Federico, N. Bertoldi, B. Cowan, W. Shen, C. Moran,
R. Zens, C. Dyer, O. Bojar, A. Constantin, and E. Herbst. Moses: Open Source Toolkit for Statistical
Machine Translation. In Proceedings of the Association of Computational Linguistics, Interactive Poster
and Demonstration Sessions, pages 177–180, 2007.
M.
Luong,
E.
Brevdo,
and
R.
Zhao.
Neural
Machine
Translation
(seq2seq)
Tutorial.
https://github.com/tensorﬂow/nmt, 2017.
T. Luong, H. Pham, and C. D. Manning. Effective approaches to attention-based neural machine translation.
In Proceedings of the Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural Language Processing (EMNLP), pages
1412–1421, 2015.
O. Russakovsky, J. Deng, H. Su, J. Krause, S. Satheesh, S. Ma, Z. Huang, A. Karpathy, A. Khosla, M. Bern-
stein, A. C. Berg, and L. Fei-Fei. ImageNet Large Scale Visual Recognition Challenge. arXiv preprint
arXiv:1409.0575, January 2015.
H. Schwarze and J. Hertz. Statistical Mechanics of Learning in a Large Committee Machine. In Advances in
Neural Information Processing Systems, (NIPS), pages 523–530, San Francisco, CA, USA, 1993. Morgan
Kaufmann Publishers Inc.
R. Sennrich, B. Haddow, and A. Birch. Neural Machine Translation of Rare Words with Subword Units. arXiv
preprint arXiv:1508.07909, 2016a.
R. Sennrich, B. Haddow, and A. Birch. Edinburgh Neural Machine Translation Systems for WMT 16. arXiv
preprint arXiv:1606.02891, 2016b.
H. S. Seung, H. Sompolinsky, and N. Tishby. Statistical Mechanics of Learning from Examples. Physical
Review A, 45:6056–6091, April 1992.
S. L. Smith and Q. V. Le. A Bayesian Perspective on Generalization and Stochastic Gradient Descent. arXiv
preprint arXiv:1710.06451v2, October 2017.
C. Sun, A. Shrivastava, S. Singh, and A. Gupta. Revisiting Unreasonable Effectiveness of Data in Deep Learn-
ing Era. In Proceedings of the International Conference on Computer Vision (ICCV), 2017.
H. G. Tucker. A Generalization of the Glivenko-Cantelli Theorem. The Annals of Mathematical Statistics, 30
(3):828–830, September 1959.
V. Vapnik. An Overview of Statistical Learning Theory. In IEEE Transactions on Neural Networks, volume 10,
pages 988–999, September 1998.
C. Zhang, S. Bengio, M. Hardt, B. Recht, and O. Vinyals. Understanding Deep Learning Requires Rethinking
Generalization. arXiv preprint arXiv:1611.03530v2, 2017.
J. G. Zilly, R. K. Srivastava, J. Koutník, and J. Schmidhuber. Recurrent Highway Networks. In Proceedings of
The International Conference on Machine Learning (ICML), 2017.
15

A
DETAIL ON TESTED MACHINE LEARNING DOMAINS
Based on the results presented in this paper, we suspect the power-law data-generalization behaviors
of each machine learning domain are due to the structure of the problem domain. To encourage
further theoretical investigation, this section reports precise deﬁnitions of input and output spaces,
optimized and reported loss functions for each machine learning domain, and other information that
may be relevant to predicting the data-generalization and model size scaling. Additionally, to show
the breadth of our testing, Table 1 summarizes the different domains, model architecture features,
optimization and loss functions we tested.
Table 1: Breadth of domains, model features, optimizers, loss functions tested
Loss
Domain
Model
Model Features
Optimizer
Function
Exponent
Machine
LSTM
Encoder-decoder with attention,
Adam
Token
−0.128
Translation
with and without dropout
Error
Word LMs
LSTM
GEMMs, σ+tanh non-linearities
SGD
Xentropy
−0.066
RHN
GEMMs, σ+tanh non-linearities
SGD
Xentropy
−0.070
Char LMs
RHN
GEMMs, σ+tanh non-linearities
SGD, Adam
Xentropy
−0.094
Image
ResNet
Feed-forward, CONV blocks,
Nesterov
Classify
−0.309
Classiﬁcation
pooling and skip connections
Momentum
Error
X-entropy
−0.350
Speech
DS2
Bi-LSTM, CTC loss
Adam
CER
−0.299
Recognition
Attention
Bi-LSTM, CONVs, attention layer
Adam
CER
−0.296
A.1
NEURAL MACHINE TRANSLATION
Given input and output vocabularies, VS and VT , NMT models learn a mapping DS →DT where
D· = V ∗
· (Kleene star). In this work, we use a word-piece vocabulary shared between the source
and target languages. After applying pre-processing methods3 adopted in many SOTA models, there
are 36545 sub-word tokens. We include UNK and PAD tokens for unknown words and minibatch
padding for the source domain (German, |VS| = 36547); for the target domain (English), UNK,
PAD, SOS (start-of-sequence), and EOS (end-of-sequence) are included (|VT | = 36549). The Ger-
man and English sentences in newstest2016 were on average 27 and 25 tokens long with the longest
sequences having 101 and 94 tokens respectively.
During training, we minimize cross entropy loss (i.e. the conditional probability of the target sen-
tence given the source sentence). We report per-token error rate and bits-per-token. Because our
reported metrics are per-token measure of the target language, the dataset size is given by the num-
ber of English tokens in the training set.
A.2
LANGUAGE MODELING
A.2.1
WORD LANGUAGE MODELS
During training for world language models, we unroll sequences out to length 80 for backpropaga-
tion. We also use continuous minibatching: At end of one sentence in the data set, we concatenate
an end-of-sentence designator, followed by the next sentence from the data set.
Let C be the language’s vocabulary. Then, |C| = 10, 004 after we include special symbols like the
unknown token. The input space is I = S Ci where i is the number of words previously seen in a
sequence. We use continuous minibatching, so the effective history length, i, can be very long. The
output space is O = C.
Rather than perplexity, we use normalized cross-entropy loss: −1
N
P
i ln pwi, where pwi is the
model’s predicted probability of seeing the ith token. N is either the number of sequences in a batch
for training optimization or N is the number of predicted words in the validation set.
3clean-up and byte pair encoding uses Tensorﬂow NMT WMT scripts
16

A.2.2
CHARACTER LANGUAGE MODELS
For character language models, we unroll sequences out to length 150 characters. Unlike word lan-
guage models, we use non-continuous minibatching, so some sequences end at an end-of-sentence
token. Sequences longer than 150 characters are truncated.
Let C be the language’s vocabulary of alphanumeric characters and symbols. Then, |C| = 98 after
we include special symbols like the end-of-sentence token. Similar to word language models, the
input space is I = S Ci where i is the number of characters previously seen in a sequence. Since
we use non-continuous minibatching, so the effective history length, i, is at most 150. The output
space is O = C.
Similar to word language models, we use normalized cross-entropy loss: −1
N
P
i ln pwi, where pwi
is the model’s predicted probability of seeing the ith token. N is either the number of sequences in
a batch for training optimization or N is the number of predicted characters in the validation set.
A.3
IMAGE CLASSIFICATION
ImageNet images were initially scaled proportionally so that the shortest dimension of the image
is 256 pixels. During training, these images are cropped to 224x224 as input to the CNN. Input
images are 224x224 pixels by 3 color channels of 8 bits each. Thus, the total input space size is
|I| = 224 ∗224 ∗3 ∗256 ≈38.5M. The output space is 1,000 different object classes that might
be contained in the image. For training, we also augment the dataset by modifying the brightness,
contrast, saturation, and lighting. In addition, we also ﬂip the image horizontally. 4
We optimize for classiﬁcation cross-entropy loss on each training image, and we report average
validation cross-entropy, top-1, and top-5 classiﬁcation error. Each loss calculation still follows the
power-law. However, we note that top-k classiﬁcation error (k > 1) is not a distance metric; It uses
set containment, which is not symmetric. Alternatively, it is a product of distance metrics, which is
not necessarily a distance metric.
A.4
SPEECH RECOGNITION
The audio input to speech recognition models can be represented as the sequence x = (x1, .., xt)
of length t. Each xi is an audio spectrogram over a small time window. Each predicted output is a
character, encoded as a one-hot vector, yi, representing the most probable text token at sequence step
i. Output sequences are of the form y = (y1, ..., yu). Models predict the conditional distribution
p(y|x) using an encoder-decoder form. Thus, p(y|x) = Decode(Encode(x), y).
A.4.1
DEEP SPEECH 2
In DS2 model, the encoder is represented by a stack of recurrent layers with LSTM cells and the
decoder is the connectionist temporal classiﬁcation (CTC) (Graves et al. (2006)). The CTC loss
function computes the conditional probability by marginalizing all possible alignments and it as-
sumes conditional independence between output predictions at different time steps given aligned
inputs. An extra blank label, which can be interpreted as no label, is introduced to map h and y
to the same length (i.e., an alignment or path). a is obtained by inserting (t′ - u) blanks into y. A
mapping B : a →y is deﬁned between a and y, which can be done by removing all blanks and
repeating letters in a.
PCTC(y|x) =
X
a∈B−1(y)
P(a|h)
(1)
=
X
a∈B−1(y)
t′
Y
t=1
P(at|ht)
(2)
P(at|ht) = softmax(at, ht)
(3)
4Training and data augmentation is performed using ResNet implementation in TensorPack
17

A.4.2
ATTENTION MODEL
Similar to the DS2 model, the attention model uses a stack of recurrent layers with GRU cells as
the encoder. The decoder consists of an attention layer followed by a recurrent layer. The attention
mechanism aligns the input sequence to the output sequence. The attention mechanism removes the
conditional independence assumption in output sequence that the DS2 model makes. More model,
attention mechanism, and loss function details can be found in Battenberg et al. (2017).
B
POWER-LAW LEARNING CURVE FOR COUNTING MODEL CLASSIFIER
First, we show that the expected generalization error for a counting model decreases as a power-law
with the size of number of training samples it observes. This proof inspects the asymptotic rate of
convergence of the Glivenko-Cantelli theorem limit (Tucker (1959)). Some machinery:
Let X = {0, 1} be the input space for a binary coin-ﬂip probability estimator. Let Ptrue : X →R
be the true model probability. To begin, we assume Ptrue[0] = Ptrue[1] = 0.5 (i.e., a fair coin ﬂip),
but our results easily generalize to unfairly weighted coins.
Let the training sets be Ti, such that Ti contains i iid samples from Ptrue. Further, let Ti(x) = {y ∈
Ti : y = x} be the subset of samples in Ti equal to x.
To start with, we will observe the learning behavior of a counting model, which approximates
Ptrue[x] by counting the proportion of training samples in Ti that are equal to x. Thus, Pi[x] =
|Ti(x)|
i
.
Also to start with, let the model loss calculation be l(Pi[x], Ptrue[x]) = |Pi[x]−Ptrue[i]| be the L1-
norm. This proof sequence can be easily generalized to other loss functions including L2-norm and
absolute KL-divergence, and we have empirically validated these norms show the same power-law
behavior.
Finally, we deﬁne the total loss function as the weighted average loss per output prediction:
Li :=
X
x∈X
l(Pi[x], Ptrue[x]) ∗Ptrue[x]
(4)
Theorem 1. The expected total loss for a counting model trained on Ti sampled from a true distri-
bution fair coin ﬂip is a power-law with exponent −0.5. Speciﬁcally,
E[Li] = Ω

1
√
2πi

(5)
Proof. First, we enumerate the 2i possible ordered samples Ti, and we name them uniquely as Ti,j
for j = 0, 1, . . . , 2i −1. Let Pi,j be the probability distribution predicted by a counting model
trained with the set Ti,j.
Now, we can expand the expectation as a sum:
E[Li] =
2i−1
X
j=0
[P[obtaining Ti,j] ∗Li,j]
=
2i−1
X
j=0
"
P[obtaining Ti,j] ∗
X
x∈X
l(Pi,j[x], Ptrue[x]) ∗Ptrue[x]
#
=
2i−1
X
j=0
"
P[obtaining Ti,j] ∗
X
x∈X
|Pi,j[x] −Ptrue[x]| ∗Ptrue[x]
#
Exploiting the symmetry of the fair coin ﬂip and plugging in values for Ptrue, we can simplify this
to:
E[Li] = 1
2i
2i−1
X
j=0
|Pi,j[x] −Ptrue[x]|
18

We note that Ti,j = Ti,k for j̸ = k iff the jth and kth samples each contain the same number of
instances of x ∈X. In that case, ∀x, Pi,j[x] = Pi,k[x]. Further, note that there are
 i
k

sets, Ti,j,
such that |Ti,j[x]| = k. We apply this counting argument to calculate the number Ti,j that are equal.
Let k be the number of instances of x = 0 in each set of training sets:
E[Li] = 1
2i
i
X
k=0
i
k
 
i −k
i
−1
2

= 1
2i
i
X
k=0
i
k
 i −k
i
−1
2

= 2
2i
⌊i+1
2 ⌋
X
k=0
i
k
 1
2 −k
i

= 2
2i
⌊i+1
2 ⌋
X
k=0
i
k
 1
2 −k
i

= 2
2i

1
2
⌊i+1
2 ⌋
X
k=0
i
k

−
⌊i+1
2 ⌋
X
k=0
k
i
i
k


= 2
2i

1
2
⌊i+1
2 ⌋
X
k=0
i
k

−
⌊i−1
2 ⌋
X
k=0
i −1
k


=
(
1
2i+1
  i
i
2

i even
1
2i
 i−1
i−1
2

i odd
These last steps use the observation that summing half of a set of binomial coefﬁcients gives roughly
half of 2i:
⌊i+1
2 ⌋
X
k=0
i
k

=
 2i−1
i odd
2i−1 −1
2
  i
i
2

i even
At this point, note that for i even, we have that E[Li] = E[Li+1]. Thus, to bound E[Li], it sufﬁces
to show that it is bounded for i even.
Finally, we use Sterling’s factorial approximation, i! = Ω(
√
2πi
  i
e
i), to provide the desired bound:
E[Li] =
1
2i+1
i
i
2

= Ω





√
2πi(i/e)i
2i+1
p
2π(i/2)

i/2
e
i/22





= Ω
 
(i/e)i
2i√
2πi 1
2i
  i
e
i
!
= Ω

1
√
2π i−0.5

19
