Benchmarking Materials Property Prediction 
Methods: The Matbench Test Set and 
Automatminer Reference Algorithm 
Alexander Dunn1,2*, Qi Wang1, Alex Ganose1, Daniel Dopp1, and Anubhav Jain1* 
1. Lawrence Berkeley National Laboratory, Energy Technologies Area, 1 
Cyclotron Road, Berkeley, CA 94720, United States 
2. Department of Materials Science and Engineering, University of California, 
Berkeley CA 94720, United States 
* Correspondence to ardunn@lbl.gov, ajain@lbl.gov 
 
Abstract 
We present a benchmark test suite and an automated machine learning procedure 
for evaluating supervised machine learning (ML) models for predicting properties of 
inorganic bulk materials. The test suite, Matbench, is a set of 13 ML tasks that 
range in size from 312 to 132k samples and contain data from 10 density functional 
theory-derived and experimental sources. Tasks include predicting optical, thermal, 
electronic, thermodynamic, tensile, and elastic properties given a materials 
composition and/or crystal structure. The reference algorithm, Automatminer, is a 
highly-extensible, fully-automated ML pipeline for predicting materials properties 
from materials primitives (such as composition and crystal structure) without user 
intervention or hyperparameter tuning. We test Automatminer on the Matbench 
test suite and compare its predictive power with state-of-the-art crystal graph 
neural networks and a traditional descriptor-based Random Forest model. We find 
Automatminer achieves the best performance on 8 of 13 tasks in the benchmark. 

 
 
1 
We also show our test suite is capable of exposing predictive advantages of each 
algorithm – namely, that crystal graph methods appear to outperform traditional 
machine learning methods given ~104 or greater data points. The pre-processed, 
ready-to-use Matbench tasks and the Automatminer source code are open source 
and available online (http://hackingmaterials.lbl.gov/automatminer/). We encourage 
evaluating new materials ML algorithms on the Matbench benchmark and 
comparing them against the latest version of Automatminer. 
Introduction 
 
New functional materials are vital for making fundamental advances across 
scientific domains, including computing and energy conversion. However, most 
materials are brought to commercialization primarily by direct experimental 
investigation, an approach typically limited by 20+ year design processes, 
constraints in the number of chemical systems that can be investigated, and the 
limits of a particular researcher's intuition. By utilizing materials “big data” and 
leveraging advances in machine learning (ML), the emerging field of materials 
informatics has demonstrated massive potential as a catalyst for materials 
development, alongside ab initio techniques such as high-throughput density 
functional theory1,2 (DFT). For example, by using support vector machines to search 
a space of more than 118k candidate crystal structures, Tehrani et al.3 identified, 
synthesized, and experimentally validated two novel superhard carbides. In another 
study, Cooper et al.4 applied natural language processing (NLP) techniques to 
assemble 9k photovoltaic candidates from scientific literature; equipped with 
algorithmic structure-property encodings and a design-to-device data mining 
workflow, they identified and experimentally realized a new high-performing 
panchromatic absorption dye. These examples are but two of many. The sheer 
investigative volume and potential research impact of materials data mining has 
helped brand it as “materials 4.0”5 or “the 4th paradigm”6 of materials research. 

 
 
2 
However, the growing role of ML in materials design exposes weaknesses in 
the materials data mining pipeline: first, there is no systematic method for 
comparing and selecting materials ML models. Comparing newly published models 
to existing techniques is crucial for rational ML model design and advancement of 
the field. Other fields of applied ML have seen rapid advancement in recent years in 
large part due to the creation and use of standardized community benchmarks such 
ImageNet7 (16,000+ citations) for image classification and the Stanford Question 
Answering Dataset8 (1400+ citations) for NLP. While there are commonly used 
datasets for materials problems as well, e.g., Castelli et al.’s investigation of cubic 
perovskites9, it is uncommon for two algorithms to be tested against the same 
dataset and with the same data cleaning procedures. Methods for estimating 
generalization error (e.g., the train/test split) also vary significantly. Typically, 
either the predictive error is averaged over a set of cross-validation folds (CV 
score)10 or a hold-out test set is used, with the specifics of the split procedure 
varying between studies. Furthermore, if a model’s hyperparameters are tuned to 
directly optimize one of these metrics, equivalent to trying many models and only 
reporting the best one, they may significantly misrepresent the true generalization 
error10,11 (model selection bias). Arbitrary choice of hold-out set can also bias a 
comparison in favor of one model over another (sample selection bias)12–14. Thus, the 
materials informatics community lacks a standard benchmarking method for 
critically evaluating new models. If models cannot be accurately compared, ML 
studies are difficult to reproduce and innovation suffers. 
Moreover, the breadth of materials ML tasks is so large that many models 
must still be designed and tuned by hand. While encouraging for the field, the 
recent explosion15 of novel descriptors and models has given practitioners a 
paradox-of-choice, as selecting the optimal descriptors and model for a given task is 
nontrivial. The consequences of this paradox-of-choice can be that researchers select 
suboptimal models or spend researcher time towards re-tuning models for new 
applications. Thus, an automatic algorithm – which requires no expert domain 

 
 
3 
knowledge to operate yet utilizes knowledge from published literature – could be of 
great use in prototyping, validating, and analyzing novel high-fidelity models.  
Given the above considerations, a benchmark consisting of the following two 
parts is needed: (1) a robust test suite of materials ML tasks and (2) an automatic 
“reference” model. The test suite must mitigate arbitrarily favoring one model over 
another. Furthermore, it should contain a variety of datasets such that domain-
specific algorithms can compare on specific datasets and general-purpose 
algorithms can compare across multiple relevant tasks. The second part, the 
reference algorithm, may serve multiple purposes. First, it might provide a 
community standard – or “lower bar” – which future innovation in materials ML 
should aim to surpass. Second, it can act as an entry point into materials 
informatics for non-domain specialists since it only requires a dataset as input. 
Finally, it can help determine which descriptors in the literature are most 
applicable to a given task or set of tasks.  
In this paper, we introduce both these developments - a benchmark test set 
and a reference algorithm - for application to inorganic, solid state materials 
property prediction tasks. Matbench, the test suite, is a collection of 13 materials 
science-specific data mining tasks curated to reflect the diversity of modern 
materials data. Containing both traditional “small” materials datasets of only a few 
hundred samples and large datasets of >105 samples from simulation-derived 
databases, Matbench provides a consistent nested cross validation16 (NCV) method 
for estimating regression and classification errors on a range of mechanical, 
electronic, and thermodynamic material properties. Automatminer, the reference 
algorithm, is a general-purpose and fully-automated machine learning pipeline. In 
contrast to other published models that are trained to predict a specific property, 
Automatminer is capable of predicting any materials property given materials 
primitives (e.g., chemical composition) as input when provided with a suitable 
training dataset. It does this by performing a procedure similar to a human 
researcher: by generating descriptors using Matminer’s library17 of published 
materials-specific featurizations, performing feature reduction and data 

 
 
4 
preprocessing, and determining the best machine learning model by internally 
testing various possibilities on validation data. We test Automatminer on the test 
suite in order to establish baseline performance, and we present a comparison of 
Automatminer with published ML methods. Finally, we demonstrate our 
benchmark capable of distinguishing predictive strengths and weaknesses among 
ML techniques. We expect both Matbench and Automatminer to evolve over time, 
although the current versions of these tools are ready for immediate use. As 
evidence of its usefulness, Kabiraj et al.18 have recently used Automatminer in their 
research on 2D ferromagnets. 
Results 
Matbench test suite v0.1 
 
The Matbench test suite v0.1 contains 13 supervised ML tasks from 10 
datasets. Matbench’s data is sourced from various sub-disciplines of materials 
science, such as experimental mechanical properties (alloy strength), computed 
elastic properties, computed and experimental electronic properties, optical and 
phonon properties, and thermodynamic stabilities for crystals, 2D materials, and 
disordered metals. The number of samples in each task ranges from 312 to 132,752, 
representing both relatively scarce experimental materials properties and 
comparatively abundant properties such as DFT-GGA19 formation energies. Each 
task is a self-contained dataset containing a single material primitive as input 
(either composition or composition plus crystal structure) and target property as 
output for each sample. To help enforce homogeneity, datasets are precleaned to 
remove unphysical computed data and task-irrelevant experimental data (see 
Methods for more details); thus, as opposed to many raw datasets or structured 
online repositories, Matbench’s tasks have already had their data cleaned for input 
into ML pipelines. We recommend the datasets be used as-is for consistent 
comparisons between models. To mitigate model and sample selection biases, each 
task uses a consistent nested cross-validation16 procedure for error estimation (see 

 
 
5 
Methods). The distribution of datasets with respect to application type, sample 
count, type of input data, and type of output data is illustrated in Figure 1; detailed 
notes on each task can be found in Table 1. 
 
Table 1: The dataset test suite. The test suite contains 13 separate ML tasks 
spread across 10 datasets. The test suite’s datasets are diversified across multiple 
metrics, including target property, number of samples (representing several orders 
of magnitude), and method for determining the target property. 
 
Target 
Property 
(Unit) 
Task Type 
Data Source 
Samples 
Structure 
available 
Method 
Bulk Modulus 
(GPa) 
Regression 
Materials Project20–22  
10,987 
Yes 
DFT-GGA 
Shear Modulus 
(GPa) 
Regression 
Materials Project20–22 
10,987 
Yes 
DFT-GGA 
Band Gap (eV) 
Regression 
Materials Project20,21 
106,113 
Yes 
DFT-GGA 
Metallicity 
(binary) 
Classification 
Materials Project20,21 
106,113 
Yes 
DFT-GGA 
Band Gap (eV) 
Regression 
Zhuo et al.23 
4,604 
No 
Experiment 
Metallicity 
(binary) 
Classification 
Zhuo et al.23 
4,921 
No 
Experiment 
Bulk Metallic 
Glass formation 
(binary) 
Classification 
Landolt-Bornstein 
Handbook24,25 
5,680 
No 
Experiment 
Refractive index 
(no unit) 
Regression 
Materials Project20,21,26 
4,764 
Yes 
DFPT-GGA 

 
 
6 
Formation 
Energy 
(eV/atom) 
Regression 
Materials Project20,21 
132,752 
Yes 
DFT-GGA 
Formation 
Energy 
(eV/atom) 
Regression 
Castelli et al. 9 
18,928 
Yes 
DFT-GGA 
Freq. at Last 
Phonon PhDOS 
Peak (1/cm) 
Regression 
Materials Project20,21,27 
1,296 
Yes 
DFPT-GGA 
Exfoliation 
Energy 
(meV/atom) 
Regression 
JARVIS DFT 2D28 
636 
Yes 
DFT-vDW-DF 
Steel yield 
strength (GPa) 
Regression 
Citrine Informatics29 
312 
No 
Experiment 
 

 
 
7 
 
Figure 1: Categorical dataset distribution of the 13 machine learning tasks in the 
Matbench test suite v0.1. Methods of categorization are listed on the left: 
“Application” describes the ML target property of the task as it relates to materials, 
“Num. samples” describes the number of samples in each task, “Input Type” 
describes the materials primitives that serve as input for each task, and “Task 
Type” designates the supervised ML task type. Numbers in the bars represent the 
number of tasks fitting the descriptor above it (e.g., there are 10 regression tasks). 
Automatminer Reference Algorithm 
At a high level, an Automatminer pipeline can be considered a black box that 
performs many of the steps typically performed by trained researchers (feature 

 
 
8 
extraction, feature reduction, model selection, hyperparameter tuning). Given only 
a training dataset, and without further researcher intervention or hyperparameter 
tuning, Automatminer produces a machine learning model that accepts materials 
compositions and/or crystal structures and returns predictions. Automatminer can 
create persistent end-to-end pipelines containing all internal training data, 
configuration, and the best-found model - allowing the final models to be further 
inspected, shared, and reproduced. 
As shown in Figure 2, the Automatminer pipeline is composed of four stages. 
In the first stage, autofeaturization, Automatminer generates potentially relevant 
features using Matminer’s featurizer library17 and verifies that each featurizer is 
valid for a threshold percentage (default 90%) of materials input objects. An 
example of an invalid behavior would be trying to apply a featurizer that is not 
parameterized for noble gases to crystals or compounds containing those elements. 
Automatminer next applies each featurizer in an error-tolerant fashion, expanding 
a material primitive into potentially many thousands of features derived from 
published literature. The next step in the pipeline is the cleaning stage. This 
prepares the feature matrix for ML by handling errors (e.g., imputing unknown 
values) and encoding categorical features. The third stage uses one or more 
dimensionality reduction algorithms (e.g., based on Pearson correlation 
coefficients30 or principal component analysis31) to reduce the feature vector 
dimension, removing, for example, redundant or linearly dependent sets of features. 
Finally, an AutoML stage searches a pre-defined space of internal pipelines which 
are entirely agnostic to materials inputs. These tree-based internal pipelines as 
implemented in the TPOT library32 include techniques for normalization, nonlinear 
transformations, and ML models with corresponding hyperparameter grids. Each 
stage can be extensively customized to facilitate end-user needs; for example, 
pipelines can retain custom features, use single models instead of AutoML, and fine 
tune feature selection hyperparameters. However, pre-configured pipeline presets 
are available based on memory, CPU, and time constraints, and no user 
customization is required to train or predict using materials data when using these 

 
 
9 
presets. In this work, we report results generated using the "Express" preset, which 
is designed to run with a maximum AutoML training time of 24 hours. 
 
 
Figure 2: The AutoML + Matminer (Automatminer) pipeline, which can be applied 
to composition-only datasets, structure datasets, and datasets containing electronic 
bandstructure information. Once fit, the pipeline accepts one or more materials 
primitives and returns a prediction of a materials property. During 
autofeaturization, the input dataset is populated with potentially relevant features 
using the Matminer library. Next, data cleaning and feature reduction stages 
prepare the feature matrices for input to an AutoML search algorithm. During 
training, the final stage searches ML pipelines for optimal configurations; during 
prediction, the best ML pipeline (according to validation score) is used to make 
predictions. 
 
 
We evaluate Automatminer on the Matbench test suite and provide 
comparisons with alternative algorithms in Figure 3. The evaluation is performed 

 
 
10 
using a five-fold Nested Cross Validation (NCV) procedure. In contrast to relying on 
a single train-test split, in the five-fold NCV procedure, five different train-test sets 
are created. For each of the five train-test sets, a machine learning model is fit 
using only the training data and evaluated on the test data. Note that this implies 
that even for a single type of model (e.g., Automatminer or CGCNN33), a slightly 
different model will be trained for each of the five splits since the training data 
differs between splits. The errors from the five different overall runs are averaged 
to give the overall score. Note that within each of the five runs of this outer loop, the 
training data portion is generally split using an inner cross-validation that is used 
for model selection within the training data, hence the name "Nested Cross 
Validation" (in our procedure, an algorithm can make use of the training data 
however it chooses). One advantage of 5-fold nested CV over a traditional train-test 
split is that each sample in the overall dataset is present as training in four of the 
splits and as test in one of the splits. 
 
For all tasks, the Automatminer “Express” preset configuration is used in 
this work. The Express preset only implements featurizers from Matminer that are 
broadly applicable (tend to produce valid feature values for almost all compositions 
and/or crystal structures), are computationally efficient (<2s/sample), and can be 
trivially transformed from matrices to vectors for each sample. "Express" feature 
reduction typically retains between 20 and 200 features based on a feature 
importance threshold from a Random Forest34 model. The reduced number of 
features allows for accelerated evolution of the TPOT genetic algorithm within the 
Express training time limit of 24 hours. Further details can be found in the Methods 
and Supplementary Information. While other presets are available in 
Automatminer, we have found that the Express preset generally retains 95% or 
more of the accuracy of more expensive presets on multiple data-scarce tasks (bulk 
metallic glass classification, experimental band gap regression/classification, 
exfoliation energy regression) at less than 50% of the computational cost to reach 
reasonable AutoML convergence. We emphasize that the Automatminer Express 

 
 
11 
preset is a single configuration capable of fitting on all Matbench tasks with no 
additional input or configuration. We do not modify this preset for different tasks. 
Four alternative algorithms are used for comparison. To simulate a control, a 
Dummy model predicts the mean of the training set (regression) or randomly selects 
a label in proportion to the distribution of the training set (classification). As a 
second baseline representing commonly used methods, we employ a Random 
Forest34 model (RF) using Magpie elemental statistics25 and Sine Coulomb Matrix35 
(if structures are present in the dataset) to predict each property. Finally, for tasks 
containing relaxed structures, we also test against CGCNN33 and MEGNet36, two 
graph-network algorithms for general-purpose property prediction. It must be 
emphasized that a goal of Matbench is to minimize arbitrary biases when 
comparing models. Therefore, the four alternatives and Automatminer all 
underwent identical error estimation procedures (NCV on identical folds) for each 
task. 
For some Matbench tasks, we were able to find published scores of 
researcher-optimized machine learning models, which we label as the “Best 
Literature” score. However, it should be noted that although these studies report 
the same error metric (MAE) using similar datasets, the scores do not use identical 
datasets (e.g., using different data filtering algorithms to remove erroneous or 
unreliable data points) or the same error estimation procedure (e.g., they do not use 
nested cross validation and may use different proportions of train and test). 
Therefore, these scores cannot be directly compared to the algorithms listed above. 

 
 
12 
 
Figure 3: Comparison of machine learning algorithm accuracies on the Matbench 
v0.1 test suite (see Table 1 for more details of the test sets). Numbers on each 
square represent either the mean average error (regression) or mean ROC-AUC 
(classification) of a five-fold nested cross validation (NCV), except for "Best 
Literature" scores. Best Literature scores were taken from published literature 
models23,37,38 evaluated on similar tasks or datasets, often subsets of those in 
Matbench, and do not use NCV. Colors represent “prediction quality” with respect 
to either the dataset target mean average deviation (MAD) or the high/low limits of 
ROC-AUC (0.5 is equivalent to random, 1.0 is best); blue and red represent high 
and low prediction qualities, respectively. The best score for each task is outlined 
with a black box (The "Best Literature" scores are excluded because they do not use 
the same testing protocol). To account for variance from choice of NCV split, 
multiple scores may be outlined if within 1% of the true “best” score. A comparison 
with a pure Random Forest (RF) model using Magpie25 and SineCoulombMatrix35 
features is provided for reference. Dummy predictor results are also shown for each 
task. All Automatminer, CGCNN, MEGNet, and RF results were generated using 

 
 
13 
the same NCV test procedure on identical train/test folds; all featurizer (descriptor) 
fitting, hyperparameter optimization, internal validation, and model selection were 
done on the training set only. A full breakdown of all error estimation procedures 
can be found in Methods.  
 
All models outperform Dummy on all tasks: the Dummy comparison exhibits 
errors between 68% and 299% higher than the best model for any task. We next 
examine which algorithms perform best, with “best” taken to include scores within 
1% of the best NCV score (we find the standard deviation between folds for the 
same model is typically between 0.5 - 5%). The Automatminer Express preset has a 
best NCV score (lowest mean average error, MAE or highest receiver operating 
characteristic area under curve, ROCAUC) on 8 of 13 tasks. In particular, 
Automatminer equals or outperforms the RF pipeline on all tasks except predicting 
formation energies across the Materials Project. Among the nine structure tasks 
only, Automatminer and MEGNet both have best scores on 4 tasks each. CGCNN is 
the highest performer only for the Materials Project band gap regression task; yet, 
across the 6 tasks with more than 10# samples, the MEGNet and CGCNN scores 
are generally quite close.  
Notably, we also find Automatminer has similar errors to scores taken from 
literature. Although these results are taken directly from published reports which 
use similar – but not identical – datasets and a variety of non-NCV error 
procedures, it is notable that Automatminer can automatically generate models of 
roughly similar quality to tediously hand-optimized models. This suggests that 
similar results as those obtained in the literature can be obtained from a fully 
automated ML pipeline that requires no researcher tuning or intuition. 
 
Next, we examine how the performance of the various machine learning 
algorithms varies with the size of the training dataset without regard to the specific 
task. To do this, we normalize the errors on the various tasks by dividing the mean 
average error (MAE) by the mean average deviation (MAD) in the dataset. With 
this normalization, a model that always predicts the average of the dataset will 

 
 
14 
have an error of exactly 1.0. Using least-squares linear regression, we find 
noticeable inverse trends in the MAE/MAD relative error (Figure 4) with respect to 
the log of dataset size. Interestingly, irrespective of the target property, the rates of 
improvement with increasing dataset size (slope of the lines) are vastly different 
between algorithms. In Figure 4(a), we plot the trend for structure-based regression 
tasks only. The graph network models CGCNN and MEGNET have high relatively 
high errors on tasks with small datasets, but improve rapidly as the task’s dataset 
size increases. In contrast, the descriptor-based Automatminer and RF models have 
lower errors on small datasets, but their rates of improvement are far shallower, 
and they lose their small data advantage as the data size passes 10# samples. Both 
graph neural network approaches have similarly high rates of improvement, which 
may indicate that the underlying ML algorithms are able to leverage information 
from large datasets more efficiently than traditional ML (RF) or AutoML. This 
finding corroborates Schmidt et al.’s prediction15 that universal graph neural 
networks33,36 will dominate the state-of-the-art on large (>105 samples) materials 
datasets. 
 
In Figure 4(b), we compare Automatminer against the Random Forest model 
since these two models are able to make predictions on all regression tasks (both 
composition-only as well as composition plus structure tasks). In 4(b), AutoML’s 
advantage over more conventional techniques narrows as the number of samples 
increases. Near 105 samples, the AutoML advantage is essentially lost. This 
phenomenon can be partially explained from the 24-hour training time limitation of 
the Automatminer Express preset. Although the exact pipeline used by the RF 
model exists in the Express model space, the long training time of each ML pipeline 
reduces the AutoML search efficiency. Given enough time and computational 
resources to internally validate and improve its model, it is highly probable the 
Automatminer Express preset will either find a model equivalent to or superior to 
the RF model. However, simple ML models (such as the RF we tested) can equal or 
outperform our AutoML approach if the AutoML search is inefficient in finding the 
optimal model. 

 
 
15 
 
 
Figure 4: (a) Trends in relative predictive accuracy for all algorithms on the eight 
Matbench v0.1 regression tasks with crystal structure. Algorithms are segregated 
by color. For each task-algorithm pair, the mean MAE of the nested CV test folds is 
divided by the dataset mean average deviation to get the relative error. A relative 
error of zero represents perfect predictive performance; a relative error of 1.0 is 

 
 
16 
equivalent to predicting the mean of the dataset (as in the Dummy Predictor). The 
plot is agnostic to target property. A least-squares linear regression line of the same 
color as the scatter points was fit for each algorithm. Multiple tasks have an 
identical dataset size but differ in their relative errors (e.g., log10 K and log10 G). (b) 
Similar to (a) but for all regression tasks (including those lacking crystal structure 
data as input) and only showing the two algorithms valid for all such tasks.  
 
All algorithms exhibit a noisy yet universal trend which decreases the 
relative errors as the dataset size increases, even though the underlying task is also 
changing with size. Such a trend corroborates Zhang and Ling’s observations39 
based on a survey of materials ML data in published literature, which suggests the 
relationship between error (constructed using literature CV data and scaled by 
range rather than mean average deviation) and dataset size can be fit with a 
decreasing power law. This trend identified by Zhang and Ling is similar to that 
found in the more structured results we present. However, we additionally find that 
the rate of improvement differs substantially between more conventional machine 
learning approaches versus the graph neural network approaches. Furthermore, 
despite these overall trends, it is clear that the details of the underlying task do 
matter. For example, the two graph networks (CGCNN and MEGNET) appear to 
far outperform the two traditional ML algorithms (Random Forest and 
Automatminer) on the two formation energy prediction tasks. However, they do not 
outperform the traditional algorithms by as much on the band gap regression task, 
despite the large-data domain that graph networks excel in. Similarly, while 
Automatminer outperforms the graph networks on most small datasets, MEGNet 
decisively outperforms Automatminer for the PhDOS task. The predictive 
advantage may lie in MEGNet’s specific architecture and implementation rather 
than an inherent advantage of crystal graph neural networks, given CGCNN has 
higher error than both Automatminer and MEGNet for the PhDOS task. 

 
 
17 
Discussion 
The reference algorithm and test suite presented above encompass a 
benchmark that can be used to accelerate development of supervised learning tasks 
in materials science. Automatminer provides an extensible and universal platform 
for automated model selection, while Matbench defines a consistent test procedure 
for unbiased model comparison. Together, Automatminer + Matbench define a 
performance baseline for machine learning models aiming to predict materials 
properties from composition or crystal structure. In this section, we address 
limitations and extensions of both the reference algorithm and the test suite. 
 
Reference algorithm analysis 
 
Although the “Express” preset was used to demonstrate Automatminer’s 
performance, the Automatminer pipeline is fully configurable at each stage. To 
reduce the complexity of developing end-to-end materials ML pipelines, 
Automatminer provides other preset configurations for varying CPU capabilities, 
time requirements, and objectives. Each preset defines a specific balance between 
computational cost and comprehensiveness of ML search. For example, the “Debug” 
preset employs only a single computationally inexpensive featurizer (Magpie 
featurizer17,25) and a heavily restricted AutoML model space restricted to a two 
minute training time; similarly, the “Debug_single” preset only uses a single 
predictor (Random Forest) in place of an AutoML algorithm. Other presets exist 
which expand on the Express featurizer set using more expensive featurization and 
longer AutoML optimization times. Generally, we observe diminishing returns on 
performance with more expensive presets; minor improvements in performance 
require significant increases in computational time. This is particularly noticeable 
on small datasets where many ML pipelines can be attempted within the time 
restriction. For instance, in classifying experimental metallicities, the Express 
preset improves ROC-AUC a negligible ~0.2% (0.919) on average over Debug 
(0.917), with the Heavy (most expensive) preset improving only another 0.6% 

 
 
18 
(0.925). Further details on the comparison of presets can be found in the 
Supplementary Information. 
 
Automatminer may be further improved by including more descriptor 
techniques in its featurizer sets, especially if those featurizers provide information-
dense features at low computational cost. For example, Automatminer does not 
implement any features for determining 2nd-nearest neighbor coordination, an 
important structural motif representing medium-range order. Lack of relevant 
featurizers may also explain the graph networks’ advantages in predicting certain 
thermodynamic properties. Due to the ability of crystal graph networks to 
effectively convolve site/bond data, they may more accurately represent 3D chemo-
spatial information than traditional descriptors. Future Automatminer 
development might benefit from using the chemo-spatial data (hidden-layer 
embeddings) from crystal graph networks as input via transfer learning; similarly, 
graph-composition networks such as RooSt40, which have demonstrated success in 
learning hidden representations from stoichiometry alone, may serve as a valuable 
improvement on Automatminer’s current featurizer set. Adding such descriptors to 
Automatminer is well within its current capabilities, since Automatminer is 
extensible (with respect to featurizers) by design. 
 
With respect to machine learning models searched by the AutoML library, we 
find that the majority of AutoML training on materials ML tasks find tree-ensemble 
methods perform better than the other models in the search space such as k-nearest 
neighbors, logistic regression, and elastic net regression. On small datasets, we 
observe tree-ensembles have sufficient model complexity to model material-property 
relationships more faithfully than regularized linear methods or logistic regression. 
However, the dominance of tree-ensembles is in part an artifact of the relatively 
small model search space of Automatminer, which at present does not include 
nonlinear support vector machine kernels or neural networks. Models with higher 
complexity, such as deep neural networks, may also improve Automatminer’s 
performance on large datasets. Thus, the AutoML search can be improved by 
expanding the model space at increasing computational cost. However, regardless of 

 
 
19 
the pre-defined model space or feature set construction, thoughtfully-engineered 
models such as graph networks or other concepts will likely be able to exceed the 
baseline AutoML model’s performance. An AutoML algorithm is best suited for the 
rapid prototyping of more complex human-tuned models rather than the 
replacement of architectures designed with human expertise. 
 
Test suite limitations and extensions 
In the Matbench benchmark, we use NCV as a one-size-fits-all tool for 
evaluation, but it is also conceivable that domain-specific methods better estimate 
the generalization error than NCV. Ren et al.38 use “grouped” CV to estimate the 
error of their models for classifying bulk metallic glasses outside of the chemical 
systems contained in the training set. The rationale behind grouped CV is that the 
testing procedure should mimic the real-world application. In the case of bulk 
metallic glass study, the intended goal of the algorithm was to make predictions in 
chemical systems where no data points were yet present. However, a randomized 
train/test split would likely result in selecting some data points from all chemical 
systems for the training and testing data. Instead, grouped CV will first separate 
data points by chemical space, and then select an entire chemical space to fall into 
either the test or training set. This ensures that testing is conducted on new 
chemical spaces for which there is no training data within that chemical space. 
Yet, using grouped CV requires a well-defined manner for grouping the data. 
In the case of bulk metallic glasses, chemical systems are easily identified as 
natural groups since the goal is to predict data for entirely unexplored chemical 
systems. For other materials ML tasks, features for grouping may be hidden in 
subtle structural motifs or nuances of electronic configuration. Leave-one-cluster-
out CV (LOCO-CV)41 is one potential variant of grouped CV that aims to automate 
grouping by k-means clustering. However, the groups are determined by the choice 
of input features, which poses two fundamental problems with this technique. First, 
researchers employing different input features will end up with different definitions 
of groups and thus different testing procedures; this could be corrected if the 

 
 
20 
features used for the grouping procedure were standardized (even if a different set 
of input features was used for prediction). Second, the input features may not 
properly capture the most physically-relevant grouping; for example, if all input 
features are based on composition, but the most natural grouping is by a structural 
feature such as crystal type, then the resulting groups will have less value. Thus, 
for now it is largely up to researchers to determine the need for using grouped CV 
and to determine the best grouping strategy. Other strategies41,42 to predict outlier 
data in the test set may also prove useful. 
An improved benchmark could use a specific, distinct error estimation 
procedure for every task; such a procedure can be determined by domain experts to 
most accurately represent the real-world use of the algorithm. The ideal benchmark 
would therefore be a consensus of community tasks, each with an error estimation 
procedure customized to most accurately reflect the algorithm’s true error rate in 
that particular subfield. We chose NCV as a standard error estimator because there 
are few such well-agreed-upon procedures for existing materials datasets. Future 
versions of the benchmark may include error estimation procedures other than 
NCV.   
 
Matbench is not intended to be a final benchmark but a versioned resource 
that will grow with the field. The ever-increasing volume of data generated from 
advances in high-throughput experimentation and computation may enable future 
ML algorithms to predict classes of materials properties that are presently sparse. 
For example, ab initio defect calculations are presently expensive, but an 
investigation by Emery and Wolverton43 has demonstrated DFT can generate defect 
data in promising quantities for future mainstream statistical learning. Advances 
in high-throughput experimental techniques (such as automated experimentation) 
also have the possibility to vastly increase the size and scope of materials data; for 
instance, a recent study44 was able to capture UV-Vis spectroscopy data for more 
than 179,000 metal oxides. A benchmark must evolve to represent these 
advancements in materials data production. We expect Matbench to be an evolving 
representation of materials property prediction tasks, and updated versions of 

 
 
21 
Matbench will be released to reflect emerging areas of research. In a similar 
fashion, Automatminer is designed to be extensible toward new techniques for 
generating descriptors from compositions, crystal structures, and electronic band 
structures. As new research is released for converting materials objects to machine-
learnable descriptors, we intend on incorporating this knowledge into 
Automatminer’s architecture.  
Conclusion 
 
We presented Matbench v0.1, a set of ML tasks aimed at standardizing 
comparisons of materials property prediction algorithms. We also introduced 
Automatminer, a fully-automated pipeline for predicting materials properties, 
which we used to set a baseline across the task set. Using Matbench, we compare 
Automatminer with crystal graph neural network models, a traditional Random 
Forest model, and a Dummy control model. We find Automatminer’s auto-generated 
models outperform or equal the RF model across all but one task and are more 
accurate than crystal graph networks on most tasks with ~104 points or fewer. 
However, crystal graph networks appear to learn better on tasks with larger 
datasets. Automatminer can be used outside of benchmarking to make predictions 
automatically and seed research for more specialized, hand-tuned models. We 
encourage evaluating new ML algorithms on the Matbench benchmark and 
comparing with the latest version of Automatminer.  
 
Methods 
 
Raw data for Matbench v0.1 were obtained by downloading from the original 
sources. Tabular versions of some datasets are available online through Matminer’s 
dataset retrieval tools. These datasets contain metadata and auxiliary data. In 
contrast, the final Matbench datasets are curated tasks containing only the 
materials input objects and target variables, with all extraneous data removed. 

 
 
22 
Unphysical (e.g., negative DFT elastic moduli), highly uncommon or 
unrepresentative samples (e.g., solid state noble gases) were removed according to a 
specific per-task procedure. Table 2 describes the resources and steps needed to 
recreate each dataset from the original source or Matminer version. 
 
Table 2: Procedures and sources for creating datasets in Matbench v0.1. 
"Original Source" denotes the original work that produced the raw data, which 
needs not be in tabular form. Matminer source datasets are tabular versions of this 
raw data which can be retrieved with Matminer and may apply additional post-
processing or filtering to the original source data. More information on these 
datasets can be found on Matminer’s dataset summary page and in the Matminer 
source code. Additional modifications are enumerated. 
Task name 
Target Property (Unit) 
Original Source 
Matminer source 
dataset 
Additional 
modifications 
log_kvrh 
Bulk Modulus (GPa) 
Materials Project20–22 
None* 
1,2,3,6,7 
log_gvrh 
Shear Modulus (GPa) 
Materials Project20–22 
None* 
1,2,3,6,7 
mp_gap 
Band Gap (eV) 
Materials Project20,21 
None* 
1,6,7 
mp_is_metal 
Metallicity (binary) 
Materials Project20,21 
None* 
1,6,7 
expt_gap 
Band Gap (eV) 
Zhuo et al.23 
expt_gap 
8,9 
expt_is_metal 
Metallicity (binary) 
Zhuo et al.23 
expt_gap 
8,10 
glass 
Bulk Metallic Glass 
formation (binary) 
Landolt-Bornstein 
Handbook24,25 
glass_ternary_la
ndolt 
8, 11 
dielectric 
Refractive index (no 
unit) 
Materials 
Project20,21,26 
None* 
1,4,6,7 
mp_e_form 
Formation Energy 
(eV/atom) 
Materials Project20,21 
None* 
5,6,7 

 
 
23 
perovskites 
Formation Energy 
(eV/atom) 
Castelli et al.9  
castelli_perovskit
es 
7 
phonons 
Freq. at Last Phonon 
PhDOS Peak (1/cm) 
Materials 
Project20,21,27 
phonon_dielectric
_mp 
1,7 
jdft2d 
Exfoliation Energy 
(meV/atom) 
JARVIS DFT 2D28 
jarvis_dft_2d 
7 
steels 
Steel yield strength 
(GPa) 
Citrine Informatics29 
steel_strength 
8 
* Generated using the Materials Project API21 on 4/12/2019. 
1. 
Remove entries having a formation energy or energy above the convex hull more than 150meV.  
2. 
Remove entries having GVoigt, GReuss, GVRH, KVoigt, KReuss, or KVRH less than or equal to zero. 
3. 
Remove entries failing GReuss ≤ GVRH ≤ GVoigt or KReuss ≤ KVRH ≤ KVoigt 
4. 
Remove entry with refractive index less than 1.  
5. 
Remove entries having formation energies greater than 3.0eV. This operation removes ~1500 1-
dimensional crystal structures likely resulting from mis-converged DFT structure optimizations of 
Half-Heuslers present in the Materials Project database as of the generation date.  
6. 
Remove entries containing noble gases. 
7. 
Remove all columns except structure and the target variable. 
8. 
Remove all columns except composition and the target variable.  
9. 
Filter according to unique compositions by ensuring no composition has conflicting metallicity. 
10. Filter according to unique compositions by removing compositions with a range of reported band gap 
values of more than 0.1eV. For each remaining composition, select the value closest to the mean of that 
composition's reported values.  
11. Filter according to unique compositions, removing compositions with any conflicting bulk metallic glass 
formation classifications. 
 
 
Five-fold nested cross validation was used to evaluate each algorithm on 
every task of the benchmark. The outer test loop of the cross validation used 
uniformly randomized splits generated with scikit-learn45 KFold (random seed 
18012019). The splits were identical for each algorithm. Classification tasks used 
stratified cross validation generated with StratifiedKFold (random seed 18012019) 
to more accurately represent classification performance with unbalanced numbers 
of each class label. Within each of the five splits, 80% training + validation data is 
given to the algorithm to optimize the model internally, and the remaining 20% is 

 
 
24 
used for testing. After predicting on each of the five 20% test splits, the error or 
AUC is averaged over the five folds. The internal validation and model selection 
process is dependent on the algorithm. 
It is worthwhile to quickly enumerate the limitations of NCV and justify its 
use. First, NCV is computationally expensive. For k-fold NCV, the traditional hold-
out tuning/validation/test procedure must be repeated k times. NCV also depends 
on the choice of internal learning procedure for each fold, an aspect which mimics 
the selection process used by other resampling methods; thus, even when the test 
sets are fixed, repeating identical procedures can produce error estimates with high 
variance46. Several alternative schemes have been proposed which preserve NCV’s 
advantages while attempting to mitigate issues from increased variability and 
computational cost. One potential improvement is repeated NCV; but even this 
approach demonstrates large variation of loss estimates across nested CV runs and 
is even more computationally expensive than NCV47. A promising alternative 
proposes a smooth analytical alternative to NCV which would reduce the NCV’s 
computational intensity46. This analytical alternative also reduces the variability 
introduced by learning set choice using weights determined after the outer CV loop 
has been fixed. Yet, the analytical alternative relies on critical assumptions which 
do not hold for particular models such as support vector machines with noisy 
observations. Therefore, at this time, NCV is an adequate method for evaluating 
and comparing models using the Matbench benchmark.  
 
The descriptor-based RF and Automatminer models use Matminer17 to 
generate all descriptors and have identical data cleaning procedures. The Random 
Forest model uses the SineCoulombMatrix35 featurizer for tasks containing 
structure and mean, average deviation, range, and max/min statistics on elemental 
Magpie25 features (implemented as the “magpie” preset for the ElementProperty 
featurizer) for all tasks containing chemical compositions. To handle missing 
features, the RF pipeline drops features with more than 1% missing values. 
Remaining samples having missing features are imputed using the mean of the 
known data. Categorical features were encoded using one-hot encoding. The 

 
 
25 
Random Forest model itself consisted of 500 estimators and a max depth of “None”, 
meaning nodes are expanded until all leaves are pure or contain less than 2 
samples.  
Automatminer v1.0.3.20191111 was used for all Automatminer benchmarks. 
Features were generated according to Automatminer’s autofeaturizer “Express” 
preset, and a full list of featurizers is available in the Supplementary Information. 
The number of features was reduced using an ensemble-based decision tree method 
set to capture 99% of the Gini importance48. Finally, TPOT v.10.1 was used to train 
and internally validate (5-fold CV within the training data) competing ML pipelines 
before selecting the model used to make test predictions. TPOT uses an 
evolutionary algorithm to optimize the hyperparameters in a given model space. In 
this context, algorithms (e.g., support vector machines, gradient boosted trees) are 
integrated into their existing hyperparameter grids such that the algorithms are 
treated essentially as special hyperparameters. Internal TPOT pre- and post-
processing steps (such as normalization) are also included in the model space. 
Rather than determining a set number of generations to evolve the model 
population, the Automatminer "Express" preset sets TPOT to evaluate the 
maximum number of generations of 100 individuals each within 24 hours given a 
maximum evaluation time of 20 minutes per individual. Individuals were trained 
and evaluated with 10x parallelism using the n_jobs Automatminer preset 
configuration option. A full table of the Automatminer-TPOT model space is 
described in the Supplementary Information. 
 
CGCNN and MEGNet models were trained and optimized by splitting the 
training portion of each outer NCV fold into 75% train and 25% validation portions. 
Thus, the overall split for each fold is 60% training, 20% validation, and 20% test. 
Each model is trained in epochs of 128-structure batches by optimizing according to 
mean squared error loss (regression) or binary cross-entropy (classification). After 
each epoch, the validation loss is computed with the same scoring functions as the 
final evaluation: MAE for regression or ROC-AUC for classification (made negative 
so that higher loss represents worse performance). To prevent overfitting, the 

 
 
26 
training is stopped early when the validation loss does not improve over a period of 
at least 500 epochs. A full table of hyperparameters for each algorithm is provided 
in the Supplementary Information. 
Each model’s training, validation, and evaluation for each NCV fold were 
performed on separate groups of compute nodes. Each fold of the RF model and 
Automatminer were trained and evaluated on a single 24-core Intel Xeon E5-2670 
v3 with 64GB RAM (LR4 node). All CGCNN and MEGNET training was performed 
using one NVIDIA 1080Ti GPU using CUDA (accompanied by two Intel Xeon E5-
2623 CPUs with 60GB RAM). Workflows were set up and executed using the 
FireWorks49 software package. 
Data Availability 
Instructions for downloading and using the Matbench benchmark can be viewed on 
the official documentation 
(https://hackingmaterials.lbl.gov/automatminer/datasets.html). The datasets can 
also be interactively viewed and examined on the Materials Project MPContribs-ML 
platform (https://ml.materialsproject.org) as serialized tabular data. The code for 
retrieving and loading the Matbench datasets can be found in the dataset_retrieval 
folder of the Matminer code (https://github.com/hackingmaterials/matminer). We 
also encourage readers to suggest modifications to the Matbench dataset test suite 
on the help forum (https://discuss.matsci.org/c/matminer).  All versions of the 
Automatminer code are open source via a BSD-style license and are available 
through the online repository (https://github.com/hackingmaterials/automatminer). 
We note that all the code for running the specific tests in this paper is also present 
in a subpackage of this repository: 
(https://github.com/hackingmaterials/automatminer/tree/master/automatminer_dev
).  
 

 
 
27 
Author Contributions 
AD, QW, and AJ conceived the project.  AD, QW, DD, and AJ designed the dataset 
test suite. AD, QW, and AG implemented the Automatminer codebase. AD and QW 
performed the benchmarking tests. AD prepared the manuscript. AJ supervised the 
project. All authors reviewed and edited the manuscript.  
 
Competing Interests 
The authors declare no competing interests. 
 
Acknowledgements 
This work was intellectually led and funded by the United States Department of 
Energy, Office of Basic Energy Sciences, Early Career Research Program, which 
provided funding for AD, QW, AG, DD, and AJ. Lawrence Berkeley National 
Laboratory is funded by the DOE under award DE-AC02-05CH11231. This research 
used the Lawrencium computational cluster resource provided by the IT Division at 
the Lawrence Berkeley National Laboratory (Supported by the Director, Office of 
Science, Office of Basic Energy Sciences, of the U.S. Department of Energy under 
Contract No. DE-AC02-05CH11231). This research used resources of the National 
Energy Research Scientific Computing Center (NERSC), a U.S. Department of 
Energy Office of Science User Facility operated under Contract No. DE-AC02-
05CH11231. We thank Samy Cherfaoui of the Electrical Engineering and Computer 
Science Department at the University of California, Berkeley for code contributions. 
We also thank Patrick Huck for assistance in hosting the data on the MPContribs 
platform through the Materials Project. 
 

 
 
28 
References 
1. Kohn, W. & Sham, L. J. Self-Consistent Equations Including Exchange and Correlation Effects. 
Phys Rev 140, A1133–A1138 (1965). 
2. Hohenberg, P. & Kohn, W. Inhomogeneous Electron Gas. Phys Rev 136, B864–B871 (1964). 
3. Mansouri Tehrani, A. et al. Machine Learning Directed Search for Ultraincompressible, 
Superhard Materials. J. Am. Chem. Soc. 140, 9844–9853 (2018). 
4. Cooper, C. B. et al. Design-to-Device Approach Affords Panchromatic Co-Sensitized Solar Cells. 
Adv. Energy Mater. 9, 1802820 (2019). 
5. Jose, R. & Ramakrishna, S. Materials 4.0: Materials big data enabled materials discovery. Appl. 
Mater. Today 10, 127–132 (2018). 
6. Agrawal, A. & Choudhary, A. Perspective: Materials informatics and big data: Realization of the 
“fourth paradigm” of science in materials science. APL Mater. 4, 053208 (2016). 
7. Deng, J. et al. ImageNet: A large-scale hierarchical image database. in 2009 IEEE Conference on 
Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition 248–255 (IEEE, 2009). 
doi:10.1109/CVPR.2009.5206848. 
8. Rajpurkar, P., Zhang, J., Lopyrev, K. & Liang, P. SQuAD: 100,000+ Questions for Machine 
Comprehension of Text. ArXiv160605250 Cs (2016). 
9. Castelli, I. E. et al. New cubic perovskites for one- and two-photon water splitting using the 
computational materials repository. Energy Environ. Sci. 5, 9034 (2012). 
10. Hastie, T., Tibshirani, R. & Friedman, J. H. Chapter 7: Model Assessment and Selection. in The 
elements of statistical learning: data mining, inference, and prediction 241–249 (Springer, 2009). 
11. Cawley, G. C. & Talbot, N. L. C. On Over-fitting in Model Selection and Subsequent Selection 
Bias in Performance Evaluation. J. Mach. Learn. Res. 11, 2079–2107 (2010). 
12. Heckman, J. J. Sample Selection Bias as a Specification Error. Econometrica 47, 153 (1979). 
13. Alexander J. Smola, Arthur Gretton, Karsten M. Borgwardt & Bernhard Scholkopf. Correcting 
sample selection bias by unlabeled data. in NIPS’06 Proceedings of the 19th International 
Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems 601–608 (2006). 

 
 
29 
14. Miroslav Dud ́ık, Robert E. Schapire & Steven J. Phillips. Correcting sample selection bias in 
maximum entropy density estimation. in NIPS’05 Proceedings of the 18th International 
Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems 323–330. 
15. Schmidt, J., Marques, M. R. G., Botti, S. & Marques, M. A. L. Recent advances and applications 
of machine learning in solid-state materials science. Npj Comput. Mater. 5, 83 (2019). 
16. Stone, M. Cross-Validatory Choice and Assessment of Statistical Predictions. J. R. Stat. Soc. Ser. 
B Methodol. 36, 111–147 (1974). 
17. Ward, L. et al. Matminer: An open source toolkit for materials data mining. Comput. Mater. Sci. 
152, 60–69 (2018). 
18. Kabiraj, A., Kumar, M. & Mahapatra, S. High-throughput discovery of high Curie point two-
dimensional ferromagnetic materials. Npj Comput. Mater. 6, 35 (2020). 
19. Perdew, J. P. & Yue, W. Accurate and simple density functional for the electronic exchange 
energy: Generalized gradient approximation. Phys. Rev. B 33, 8800–8802 (1986). 
20. Jain, A. et al. Commentary: The Materials Project: A materials genome approach to accelerating 
materials innovation. APL Mater. 1, 011002 (2013). 
21. Ong, S. P. et al. The Materials Application Programming Interface (API): A simple, flexible and 
efficient API for materials data based on REpresentational State Transfer (REST) principles. 
Comput. Mater. Sci. 97, 209–215 (2015). 
22. de Jong, M. et al. Charting the complete elastic properties of inorganic crystalline compounds. 
Sci. Data 2, 150009 (2015). 
23. Zhuo, Y., Mansouri Tehrani, A. & Brgoch, J. Predicting the Band Gaps of Inorganic Solids by 
Machine Learning. J. Phys. Chem. Lett. 9, 1668–1673 (2018). 
24. Nonequilibrium phase diagrams of ternary amorphous alloys. (Springer, 1997). 
25. Ward, L., Agrawal, A., Choudhary, A. & Wolverton, C. A general-purpose machine learning 
framework for predicting properties of inorganic materials. Npj Comput. Mater. 2, 16028 (2016). 
26. Petousis, I. et al. High-throughput screening of inorganic compounds for the discovery of novel 
dielectric and optical materials. Sci. Data 4, 160134 (2017). 

 
 
30 
27. Petretto, G. et al. High-throughput density-functional perturbation theory phonons for inorganic 
materials. Sci. Data 5, 180065 (2018). 
28. Choudhary, K., Kalish, I., Beams, R. & Tavazza, F. High-throughput Identification and 
Characterization of Two-dimensional Materials using Density functional theory. Sci. Rep. 7, 
5179 (2017). 
29. Gareth Conduit & Saurabh Bajaj. Mechanical properties of some steels. (2017). 
30. Freedman, D., Pisani, R. & Purves, R. Statistics (international student edition). Pisani R Purves 
4th Edn WW Nort. Co. N. Y. (2007). 
31. Hotelling, H. Analysis of a complex of statistical variables into principal components. J. Educ. 
Psychol. 24, 417–441 (1933). 
32. Olson, R. S. et al. Automating Biomedical Data Science Through Tree-Based Pipeline 
Optimization. in Applications of Evolutionary Computation (eds. Squillero, G. & Burelli, P.) vol. 
9597 123–137 (Springer International Publishing, 2016). 
33. Xie, T. & Grossman, J. C. Crystal Graph Convolutional Neural Networks for an Accurate and 
Interpretable Prediction of Material Properties. Phys. Rev. Lett. 120, 145301 (2018). 
34. Breiman, L. Random Forests. Mach Learn 45, 5–32 (2001). 
35. Faber, F., Lindmaa, A., von Lilienfeld, O. A. & Armiento, R. Crystal structure representations 
for machine learning models of formation energies. Int. J. Quantum Chem. 115, 1094–1101 
(2015). 
36. Chen, C., Ye, W., Zuo, Y., Zheng, C. & Ong, S. P. Graph Networks as a Universal Machine 
Learning Framework for Molecules and Crystals. Chem. Mater. 31, 3564–3572 (2019). 
37. Choudhary, K., DeCost, B. & Tavazza, F. Machine learning with force-field-inspired descriptors 
for materials: Fast screening and mapping energy landscape. Phys. Rev. Mater. 2, 083801 (2018). 
38. Ren, F. et al. Accelerated discovery of metallic glasses through iteration of machine learning and 
high-throughput experiments. Sci. Adv. 4, eaaq1566 (2018). 
39. Zhang, Y. & Ling, C. A strategy to apply machine learning to small datasets in materials science. 
Npj Comput. Mater. 4, 25 (2018). 

 
 
31 
40. Goodall, R. E. A. & Lee, A. A. Predicting materials properties without crystal structure: Deep 
representation learning from stoichiometry. ArXiv191000617 Cond-Mat Physicsphysics (2019). 
41. Meredig, B. et al. Can machine learning identify the next high-temperature superconductor? 
Examining extrapolation performance for materials discovery. Mol. Syst. Des. Eng. 3, 819–825 
(2018). 
42. Xiong, Z. et al. Evaluating explorative prediction power of machine learning algorithms for 
materials discovery using k-fold forward cross-validation. Comput. Mater. Sci. 171, 109203 
(2020). 
43. Emery, A. A. & Wolverton, C. High-throughput DFT calculations of formation energy, stability 
and oxygen vacancy formation energy of ABO3 perovskites. Sci. Data 4, 170153 (2017). 
44. Stein, H. S., Soedarmadji, E., Newhouse, P. F., Dan Guevarra & Gregoire, J. M. Synthesis, 
optical imaging, and absorption spectroscopy data for 179072 metal oxides. Sci. Data 6, 9 (2019). 
45. Pedregosa, F. et al. Scikit-learn: Machine Learning in Python. J. Mach. Learn. Res. 12, 2825–
2830 (2011). 
46. Bernau, C., Augustin, T. & Boulesteix, A.-L. Correcting the Optimal Resampling-Based Error 
Rate by Estimating the Error Rate of Wrapper Algorithms: Estimating the Error Rate of 
Wrapper Algorithms. Biometrics 69, 693–702 (2013). 
47. Krstajic, D., Buturovic, L. J., Leahy, D. E. & Thomas, S. Cross-validation pitfalls when selecting 
and assessing regression and classification models. J. Cheminformatics 6, 10 (2014). 
48. Breiman, L., Friedman, J. H., Olshen, R. A. & Stone, C. J. Classification And Regression Trees. 
(Routledge, 2017). doi:10.1201/9781315139470. 
49. Jain, A. et al. FireWorks: a dynamic workflow system designed for high-throughput applications: 
FireWorks: A Dynamic Workflow System Designed for High-Throughput Applications. Concurr. 
Comput. Pract. Exp. 27, 5037–5059 (2015). 
 

Supplementary Information 
For Benchmarking Materials Property Prediction Methods: The Matbench Test 
Set and Automatminer Reference Algorithm  
By Alexander Dunn, Qi Wang, Alex Ganose, Daniel Dopp, and Anubhav Jain 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

1. Training and prediction timing 
 

 
Figure S1: Training and prediction times (in node hours) for MEGNet1, CGCNN2, 
Automatminer, and the Random Forest3 (RF) algorithm on the Matbench test suite 
in log-log scale. All 13 tasks in Matbench (including composition-only tasks) are 
shown for Automatminer and the RF algorithms; only the 9 structure tasks are 
shown for the graph networks MEGNet and CGCNN. Each point represents a single 
fold of nested cross validation for each task. Each fold of the RF model and 
Automatminer were trained and evaluated on a compute node containing a single 
24-core Intel Xeon E5-2670 v3 with 64GB RAM (LR4 node). Similarly, all CGCNN 
and MEGNet training and prediction was performed using a single node containing 
two Intel Xeon E5-2623 CPUs with 60GB RAM) and one NVIDIA 1080Ti 
(parallelized with CUDA); multiple GPUs were not used as, at the time of training, 
neither CGCNN nor MEGNet support multi-GPU training. Linear regressions in 
log-log scale are provided for each algorithm.  

2. Automatminer Configuration 
Beyond what is listed in Methods, the Automatminer configuration is determined by 
the specifics of two primary operations - specifying a set of Matminer4 featurizers 
(featurization) and specifying a predetermined model space. During fitting and 
prediction, Automatminer robustly applies this set of featurizers and TPOT5 
searches the model space for the optimal model. The Automatminer “Express” 
preset used to generate the results in the main text includes preset settings for a set 
of Automatminer features (Table S2.1), a data cleaning and feature reduction 
procedure (described in Methods), and settings for TPOT, including the model space 
(Tables S2.2-3). Alternate presets available in Automatminer can be explored in the 
source code. 
 
Table S2.1 Automatminer “Express” preset featurizers. The following set of  
Matminer featurizers was used for all Automatminer results in the main text.  
 
Featurizer Name 
Featurizer type 
Description 
AtomicOrbitals 
composition 
HOMO/LUMO orbitals 
estimated from atomic orbital 
energies of the composition6 
ElementProperty (“matminer” 
preset) 
composition 
Weighted elemental statistics 
from pymatgen properties7 
ElementProperty (“deml” preset) 
composition 
Weighted elemental statistics 
from Deml et al. properties8 
ElementProperty (“matscholar” 
preset) 
composition 
Weighted elemental embeddings 
from Tshitoyan et al. Word2Vec 
algorithm9 
ElementProperty (“magpie” preset) 
composition 
Weighted elemental statistics 
from Ward et al.10 
ElementFraction 
composition 
Fractions of elements in a 
composition 
Stoichiometry 
composition 
Lp (0 ≤# ≤10) norms of 
stoichiometric attributes based 

on Ward et al.10 
TMetalFraction 
composition 
Stoichiometric fraction of 
magnetic transition metal in a 
composition 
BandCenter 
composition 
Electronegativity estimate of 
absolute band center position 
using method from Butler and 
Ginley11 
DensityFeatures 
structure 
Density, volume per atom, and 
packing fraction 
GlobalSymmetryFeatures 
structure 
Spacegroup and crystal system 
determination 
EwaldEnergy 
structure 
Energy computed from Coulomb 
interactions using method from 
Ewald12 
SineCoulombMatrix 
structure 
A Coulomb matrix13 variant 
developed for periodic systems 
using method from Faber et al.14 
and vectorized using 
eigenvalues 
 
  
Table S2.2 Automatminer regression model space. The following table 
contains the list of classes (containing a scikit-learn BaseEstimator API15,16) used in 
the Automatminer regression model space. Note that many models included in the 
table are typical preprocessing steps rather than machine learning models; TPOT is 
capable of stacking these preprocessing steps and ML models into pipelines in a 
loosely structured tree hierarchy. Hyperparameter grids are defined using the 
arguments in the “Variable hyperparameter” column. Ranges for each 
hyperparameter can be found in the Automatminer source code.  
 
BaseEstimator (model) 
Variable hyperparameters 
sklearn.linear_model.ElasticNetCV 
l1_ratio, tol 
sklearn.ensemble.ExtraTreesRegressor 
n_estimators, max_features, 
min_samples_split, min_samples_leaf, 
bootstrap 

sklearn.ensemble.GradientBoostingRegresso
r 
n_estimators, loss, learning_rate, 
max_depth, min_samples_split, 
min_samples_leaf, subsample, 
max_features, alpha 
sklearn.tree.DecisionTreeRegressor 
max_depth, min_samples_split, 
min_samples_leaf 
sklearn.neighbors.KNeighborsRegressor 
n_neighbors, weights, p 
sklearn.linear_model.LassoLarsCV 
normalize 
sklearn.svm.LinearSVR 
loss, dual, tol, C, epsilon 
sklearn.ensemble.RandomForestRegressor 
n_estimators, max_features, 
min_samples_split, min_samples_leaf, 
bootstrap 
sklearn.linear_model.RidgeCV 
None 
xgboost.XGBRegressor 
n_estimators, max_depth, learning_rate, 
subsample, min_child_weight, nthread 
sklearn.preprocessing.Binarizer 
threshold 
sklearn.decomposition.FastICA 
tol 
sklearn.cluster.FeatureAgglomeration 
linkage, affinity 
sklearn.preprocessing.MaxAbsScaler 
None 
sklearn.preprocessing.MinMaxScaler 
None 
sklearn.preprocessing.Normalizer 
norm 
sklearn.kernel_approximation.Nystroem 
kernel, gamma, n_components 
sklearn.decomposition.PCA 
svd_solver, iterated_power 
sklearn.preprocessing.PolynomialFeatures 
degree, include_bias, interaction_only 
sklearn.kernel_approximation.RBFSampler 
gamma 
sklearn.preprocessing.RobustScaler 
None 
sklearn.preprocessing.StandardScaler 
None 
tpot.builtins.ZeroCount 
None 
tpot.builtins.OneHotEncoder 
minimum_fraction, sparse, threshold 
sklearn.feature_selection.SelectFwe 
alpha, score_func 
sklearn.feature_selection.SelectPercentil
e 
percentile, score_func 
sklearn.feature_selection.VarianceThresho
ld 
threshold 

sklearn.feature_selection.SelectFromModel threshold, estimator 
 
Table S2.3 Automatminer classification model space. The following table 
contains the list of classes (containing a scikit-learn BaseEstimator API15,16) used in 
the Automatminer classification model space. Hyperparameter grids are defined 
using the arguments in the “Variable hyperparameter” column. Ranges for each 
hyperparameter can be found in the Automatminer source code. 
 
BaseEstimator (model) 
Variable hyperparameters 
sklearn.naive_bayes.GaussianNB 
None 
sklearn.naive_bayes.BernoulliNB 
alpha, fit_prior 
sklearn.naive_bayes.MultinomialNB 
alpha, fit_prior 
sklearn.tree.DecisionTreeClassifier 
criterion, max_depth, min_samples_split, 
min_samples_leaf 
sklearn.ensemble.ExtraTreesClassifier 
n_estimators, criterion, max_features, 
min_samples_split, min_samples_leaf, 
bootstrap 
sklearn.ensemble.RandomForestClassifier 
n_estimators, criterion, max_features, 
min_samples_split, min_samples_leaf, 
bootstrap 
sklearn.ensemble.GradientBoostingClassifi
er 
n_estimators, learning_rate, max_depth, 
min_samples_split, min_samples_leaf, 
subsample, max_features 
sklearn.neighbors.KNeighborsClassifier 
n_neighbors, weights, p 
sklearn.svm.LinearSVC 
penalty, loss, dual, tol, C 
sklearn.linear_model.LogisticRegression 
penalty, C, dual 
xgboost.XGBClassifier 
n_estimators, max_depth, learning_rate, 
subsample, min_child_weight, nthread 
sklearn.preprocessing.Binarizer 
threshold 
sklearn.decomposition.FastICA 
tol 
sklearn.cluster.FeatureAgglomeration 
linkage, affinity 
sklearn.preprocessing.MaxAbsScaler 
None 
sklearn.preprocessing.MinMaxScaler 
None 
sklearn.preprocessing.Normalizer 
norm 

sklearn.kernel_approximation.Nystroem 
kernel, gamma, n_components 
sklearn.decomposition.PCA 
svd_solver, iterated_power 
sklearn.preprocessing.PolynomialFeatures 
degree, include_bias, interaction_only 
sklearn.kernel_approximation.RBFSampler 
gamma 
sklearn.preprocessing.RobustScaler 
None 
sklearn.preprocessing.StandardScaler 
None 
tpot.builtins.ZeroCount 
None 
tpot.builtins.OneHotEncoder 
minimum_fraction, sparse, threshold 
sklearn.feature_selection.SelectFwe 
alpha, score_func 
sklearn.feature_selection.SelectPercentil
e 
percentile, score_func 
sklearn.feature_selection.VarianceThresho
ld 
threshold 
sklearn.feature_selection.RFE 
step, estimator 
sklearn.feature_selection.SelectFromModel threshold, estimator 
 
3. Convolutional Graph Network Hyperparameters 
Table S3.1. CGCNN hyperparameters. The training of CGCNN models is based 
on its official repo (https://github.com/txie-93/cgcnn). The hyperparameters are 
recommended in the CGCNN paper and are used by the authors to generate the 
pretrained models placed in the repo.  Identical hyperparameters were used to 
generate the results for all tasks in the test suite. 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Table S3.2 CGCNN full model breakdown. The number of hyperparameters in a 
neural network in relation to the number of training samples can be considered a 
useful metric for analyzing the networks risk of overfitting. The table contains a full 
breakdown of the model including the number of hyperparameters for each network 
level. In total, there are 98,185 trainable parameters. 
 
Layer  
Number of parameters 
embedding.weight 
5,888 
embedding.bias 
64 
convs.0.fc_full.weight 
21,632 
convs.0.fc_full.bias 
128 
convs.0.bn1.weight 
128 
convs.0.bn1.bias 
128 
CGCNN Hyperparameters 
Setting 
Convolution layers 
4 
Epochs 
1000 (regression) / 500 (classification) 
Initial atomic feature length 
92 
Atomic feature length 
64 
Bond feature length 
41 
Hidden feature length 
32 
Batch size 
128 
Optimization algorithm 
Stochastic gradient descent 
L2 hidden layers 
1 
Learning rate 
0.02 
Learning rate milestones 
800 
momentum 
0.9 

convs.0.bn1.running_mean 
128 
convs.0.bn1.running_var 
128 
convs.0.bn1.num_batches_tracked 
1 
convs.0.bn2.weight 
64 
convs.0.bn2.bias 
64 
convs.0.bn2.running_mean 
64 
convs.0.bn2.running_var 
64 
convs.0.bn2.num_batches_tracked 
1 
convs.1.fc_full.weight 
21,632 
convs.1.fc_full.bias 
128 
convs.1.bn1.weight 
128 
convs.1.bn1.bias 
128 
convs.1.bn1.running_mean 
128 
convs.1.bn1.running_var 
128 
convs.1.bn1.num_batches_tracked 
1 
convs.1.bn2.weight 
64 
convs.1.bn2.bias 
64 
convs.1.bn2.running_mean 
64 
convs.1.bn2.running_var 
64 
convs.1.bn2.num_batches_tracked 
1 
convs.2.fc_full.weight 
21,632 
convs.2.fc_full.bias 
128 
convs.2.bn1.weight 
128 
convs.2.bn1.bias 
128 
convs.2.bn1.running_mean 
128 
convs.2.bn1.running_var 
128 
convs.2.bn1.num_batches_tracked 
1 
convs.2.bn2.weight 
64 
convs.2.bn2.bias 
64 
convs.2.bn2.running_mean 
64 
convs.2.bn2.running_var 
64 

convs.2.bn2.num_batches_tracked 
1 
convs.3.fc_full.weight 
21,632 
convs.3.fc_full.bias 
128 
convs.3.bn1.weight 
128 
convs.3.bn1.bias 
128 
convs.3.bn1.running_mean 
128 
convs.3.bn1.running_var 
128 
convs.3.bn1.num_batches_tracked 
1 
convs.3.bn2.weight 
64 
convs.3.bn2.bias 
64 
convs.3.bn2.running_mean 
64 
convs.3.bn2.running_var 
64 
convs.3.bn2.num_batches_tracked 
1 
conv_to_fc.weight 
2,048 
conv_to_fc.bias 
32 
fc_out.weight 
32 
fc_out.bias 
1 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

Table S3.3. MEGNET hyperparameters. The training of MEGNET models is 
based on its official repo v0.2.2 (https://github.com/materialsvirtuallab/megnet). The 
hyperparameters are recommended in the MEGNET paper and modified only with 
correspondence from the original authors. 
 
 
 
Table S3.4 MEGNet full model breakdown. In similar fashion to Table S3.2, 
each layer and the number of trainable parameters is enumerated. The output 
shape of the layer and its connection to further layers within the overall 
architecture is also provided. In total, the model architecture specifies 167,761 
trainable parameters. Layer types reference the syntax of the python neural 
network library Keras17; output shapes reference NumPy18 NDArray 
representations.  
 
Layer (type) 
Output Shape  
(numpy format) 
Number of 
Parameters 
Connected to   
MEGNET Hyperparameters 
Setting 
MEGNET blocks 
3 
Minimum Epochs 
1000 (regression) / 500 (classification) 
Initial atomic feature length 
95 
Element embedding length 
16 
Bond feature length 
100 
Hidden units in layer 1  
64 
Hidden units in layer 2 
32 
Hidden units in layer 3 
16 
Batch size 
128 
Optimization algorithm 
Adam 
Learning rate 
0.001 (and auto-reduce if encountering nan) 
Neighboring cutoff 
4.0 Angstrom 

input_1 (InputLayer) 
(None, None) 
0 
  
embedding_1 
(Embedding) 
(None, None, 16) 
1,520 
input_1[0][0] 
input_2 (InputLayer) 
(None, None, 100) 
0 
  
input_3 (InputLayer) 
(None, None, 2) 
0 
  
dense_1 (Dense) 
(None, None, 64) 
1,088 
embedding_1[0][0] 
dense_3 (Dense) 
(None, None, 64) 
6,464 
input_2[0][0] 
dense_5 (Dense) 
(None, None, 64) 
192 
input_3[0][0] 
dense_2 (Dense) 
(None, None, 32) 
2,080 
dense_1[0][0] 
dense_4 (Dense) 
(None, None, 32) 
2,080 
dense_3[0][0] 
dense_6 (Dense) 
(None, None, 32) 
2,080 
dense_5[0][0] 
input_4 (InputLayer) 
(None, None) 
0 
  
input_5 (InputLayer) 
(None, None) 
0 
  
input_6 (InputLayer) 
(None, None) 
0 
  
input_7 (InputLayer) 
(None, None) 
0 
  
meg_net_layer_1 
(MEGNetLayer) 
[(None, None, 32), 
…] 
39,392 
dense_2[0][0] 
dense_4[0][0] 
dense_6[0][0] 
input_4[0][0] 
input_5[0][0] 
input_6[0][0] 
input_7[0][0] 
add_1 (Add) 
(None, None, 32) 
0 
dense_2[0][0] 
meg_net_layer_1[0][0] 

add_2 (Add) 
(None, None, 32) 
0 
dense_4[0][0] 
meg_net_layer_1[0][1] 
add_3 (Add) 
(None, None, 32) 
0 
dense_6[0][0] 
meg_net_layer_1[0][2] 
dense_7 (Dense) 
(None, None, 64) 
2,112 
add_1[0][0] 
dense_9 (Dense) 
(None, None, 64) 
2,112 
add_2[0][0] 
dense_11 (Dense) 
(None, None, 64) 
2,112 
add_3[0][0] 
dense_8 (Dense) 
(None, None, 32) 
2,080 
dense_7[0][0] 
dense_10 (Dense) 
(None, None, 32) 
2,080 
dense_9[0][0] 
dense_12 (Dense) 
(None, None, 32) 
2,080 
dense_11[0][0] 
meg_net_layer_2 
(MEGNetLayer) 
[(None, None, 32), 
…] 
39,392 
dense_8[0][0] 
dense_10[0][0] 
dense_12[0][0] 
input_4[0][0] 
input_5[0][0] 
input_6[0][0] 
input_7[0][0] 
add_4 (Add) 
(None, None, 32) 
0 
add_1[0][0] 
meg_net_layer_2[0][0] 
add_5 (Add) 
(None, None, 32) 
0 
add_2[0][0] 
meg_net_layer_2[0][1] 
add_6 (Add) 
(None, None, 32) 
0 
add_3[0][0] 
meg_net_layer_2[0][2] 
dense_13 (Dense) 
(None, None, 64) 
2,112 
add_4[0][0] 
dense_15 (Dense) 
(None, None, 64) 
2,112 
add_5[0][0] 

dense_17 (Dense) 
(None, None, 64) 
2,112 
add_6[0][0] 
dense_14 (Dense) 
(None, None, 32) 
2,080 
dense_13[0][0] 
dense_16 (Dense) 
(None, None, 32) 
2,080 
dense_15[0][0] 
dense_18 (Dense) 
(None, None, 32) 
2,080 
dense_17[0][0] 
meg_net_layer_3 
(MEGNetLayer) 
[(None, None, 32), 
…] 
39,392 
dense_14[0][0] 
dense_16[0][0] 
dense_18[0][0] 
input_4[0][0] 
input_5[0][0] 
input_6[0][0] 
input_7[0][0] 
add_7 (Add) 
(None, None, 32) 
0 
add_4[0][0] 
meg_net_layer_3[0][0] 
add_8 (Add) 
(None, None, 32) 
0 
add_5[0][0] 
meg_net_layer_3[0][1] 
set2_set_1 (Set2Set) 
(None, None, 32) 
2,640 
add_7[0][0] 
input_6[0][0] 
set2_set_2 (Set2Set) 
(None, None, 32) 
2,640 
add_8[0][0] 
input_7[0][0] 
add_9 (Add) 
(None, None, 32) 
0 
add_6[0][0] 
meg_net_layer_3[0][2] 
concatenate_1 
(Concatenate) 
(None, None, 96) 
0 
set2_set_1[0][0] 
set2_set_2[0][0] 
add_9[0][0] 
dense_19 (Dense) 
(None, None, 32) 
3,104 
concatenate_1[0][0] 
dense_20 (Dense) 
(None, None, 16) 
528 
dense_19[0][0] 
dense_21 (Dense) 
(None, None, 1) 
17 
dense_20[0][0] 

4. Automatminer Preset Comparison on Experimental 
Metallicity Classification 
For tasks where the AutoML algorithm can fit and iterate models rapidly 
(i.e., the dataset is small, <104 samples), Automatminer can require increasingly 
large computational effort to marginally improve predictive performance. Therefore, 
for small datasets, the bulk of Automatminer’s performance can be retained using 
inexpensive presets (~1-5 minute training) versus more expensive presets (24h+ 
training).  
Here we show the performance of three presets on the Matbench 
experimental metallicity classification task (sourced from Zhuo et. al19). Debug 
presets use only the most inexpensive yet information-dense featurizer (MagPie4,10), 
does only correlative feature reduction (based on Pearson correlation between sets 
of features), and is limited to 2 minutes AutoML training time. The Express preset 
uses slightly more expensive featurization and model-based feature reduction (as 
explained in Supplement Section 2 and in the main text) and uses a much longer 
maximum AutoML training time of 24 hours. Finally, the Heavy preset utilizes a 
wide range of Matminer featurizers, many of which are computationally expensive 
relative to the Express and Debug presets, and employs more expensive AutoML 
training with 48-hour time limit. Note the TPOT AutoML training algorithm can 
halt training early if the internal validation score does not improve over many 
training epochs; this is similar to “early stopping” of neural network training. The 
Express and Heavy presets marginally improve on the Debug ROC-AUC at the cost 
of much (more than 1000x) higher runtimes.  
While this case is not representative of all supervised materials ML tasks 
even within the Matbench test suite, it illustrates that the gap between expensive 
and inexpensive pipelines may significantly narrow as the dataset size decreases. 
 

 
Figure S2: Comparison of Automatminer presets demonstrating diminishing 
AutoML returns on the Matbench experimental metallicity classification task. The 
abscissa shows three Automatminer presets – Debug, Express, and Heavy - in 
ascending order of computational intensity. Points represent the mean values 
among folds from a full 5-fold NCV evaluation on the metallicity task; error bars are 
the standard deviation between folds (error bars are ~<1% of mean value if not 
visible). ROC-AUC represents the receiver operating characteristic area under the 
curve for metallicity predictions; runtime is the elapsed time from the beginning of 

training to the end of prediction for each fold. The number of features is counted 
following feature reduction and represents the input to the AutoML algorithm. 
Debug has a much higher number of features because its preset undergoes minimal 
correlation-based feature reduction only.  
 
5. Supplement References 
 1. Chen, C., Ye, W., Zuo, Y., Zheng, C. & Ong, S. P. Graph Networks as a Universal Machine 
Learning Framework for Molecules and Crystals. Chem. Mater. 31, 3564–3572 (2019). 
2. Xie, T. & Grossman, J. C. Crystal Graph Convolutional Neural Networks for an Accurate and 
Interpretable Prediction of Material Properties. Phys. Rev. Lett. 120, 145301 (2018). 
3. Breiman, L. Random Forests. Mach Learn 45, 5–32 (2001). 
4. Ward, L. et al. Matminer: An open source toolkit for materials data mining. Comput. Mater. Sci. 
152, 60–69 (2018). 
5. Olson, R. S. et al. Automating Biomedical Data Science Through Tree-Based Pipeline 
Optimization. in Applications of Evolutionary Computation (eds. Squillero, G. & Burelli, P.) vol. 
9597 123–137 (Springer International Publishing, 2016). 
6. Kotochigova, S., Levine, Z. H., Shirley, E. L., Stiles, M. D. & Clark, C. W. Local-density-
functional calculations of the energy of atoms. Phys. Rev. A 55, 191–199 (1997). 
7. Ong, S. P. et al. Python Materials Genomics (pymatgen): A robust, open-source python library for 
materials analysis. Comput. Mater. Sci. 68, 314–319 (2013). 
8. Deml, A. M., O’Hayre, R., Wolverton, C. & Stevanovic, V. Predicting Density Functional Theory 
Total Energies and Enthalpies of Formation of Metal-Nonmetal Compounds by Linear 
Regression. ChemInform 47, (2016). 
9. Tshitoyan, V. et al. Unsupervised word embeddings capture latent knowledge from materials 
science literature. Nature 571, 95–98 (2019). 

10. Ward, L., Agrawal, A., Choudhary, A. & Wolverton, C. A general-purpose machine learning 
framework for predicting properties of inorganic materials. Npj Comput. Mater. 2, 16028 (2016). 
11. Butler, M. A. Prediction of Flatband Potentials at Semiconductor-Electrolyte Interfaces from 
Atomic Electronegativities. J. Electrochem. Soc. 125, 228 (1978). 
12. Ewald, P. P. Die Berechnung optischer und elektrostatischer Gitterpotentiale. Ann. Phys. 369, 
253–287 (1921). 
13. Rupp, M., Tkatchenko, A., Müller, K.-R. & von Lilienfeld, O. A. Fast and Accurate Modeling of 
Molecular Atomization Energies with Machine Learning. Phys. Rev. Lett. 108, 058301 (2012). 
14. Faber, F., Lindmaa, A., von Lilienfeld, O. A. & Armiento, R. Crystal structure representations 
for machine learning models of formation energies. Int. J. Quantum Chem. 115, 1094–1101 
(2015). 
15. Pedregosa, F. et al. Scikit-learn: Machine Learning in Python. J. Mach. Learn. Res. 12, 2825–
2830 (2011). 
16. Buitinck, L. et al. API design for machine learning software: experiences from the scikit-learn 
project. in ECML PKDD Workshop: Languages for Data Mining and Machine Learning 108–122 
(2013). 
17. Chollet, F. & others. Keras. (2015). 
18. van der Walt, S., Colbert, S. C. & Varoquaux, G. The NumPy Array: A Structure for Efficient 
Numerical Computation. Comput. Sci. Eng. 13, 22–30 (2011). 
19. Zhuo, Y., Mansouri Tehrani, A. & Brgoch, J. Predicting the Band Gaps of Inorganic Solids by 
Machine Learning. J. Phys. Chem. Lett. 9, 1668–1673 (2018). 
 
 
 
