Artificial Neural Networks for Predicting Mechanical Properties
of Crystalline Polyamide12 via Molecular Dynamics Simulations
Caglar Tamur†, Shaofan Li†1, Danielle Zeng‡
†Department of Civil and Environmental Engineering, University of California, Berkeley, California, USA
‡Ford Motor Company, Dearborn, Michigan, USA
Abstract
Predicting material properties of 3D printed polymer products is a challenge in additive
manufacturing due to the highly localized and complex manufacturing process. The mi-
crostructure of such products is fundamentally different from the ones obtained by using
conventional manufacturing methods, which makes the task even more difficult. As a first
step of a systematic multiscale approach, in this work, we have developed an artificial neural
network (ANN) to predict the mechanical properties of the crystalline form of Polyamide12
(PA12) based on data collected from molecular dynamics (MD) simulations. Using the ma-
chine learning approach, we are able to predict the stress-strain relations of PA12 once the
macroscale deformation gradient is provided as an input to the ANN. We have shown that
this is an efficient and accurate approach, which can provide a three-dimensional molecular-
level anisotropic stress-strain relation of PA12 for any macroscale mechanics model, such as
finite element modeling at arbitrary quadrature points. This work lays the foundation for
a multiscale finite element method for simulating semicrystalline polymers, which will be
published as a separate study.
Keywords:
molecular dynamics; crystalline polymers; reaxff; polyamide; machine learning;
neural network
1. Introduction
Material modeling of 3D printed material products has been a great challenge for additive
manufacturing and other advanced manufacturing technologies. In additive manufacturing,
the product is built on a material point upon a material point; thus, the resultant properties
are highly dependent on the printing process both spatially and temporally at the localized
regions. A microstructurally informed and robust mechanical model is highly anticipated,
as it would help to overcome the challenges with manufacturing process, product design,
and material selection.
One of the promising approaches is the multiscale modeling of 3D printed materials
[1, 2, 3], which has the ability to extract bottom-up material information to assess the
1Email:shaofan@berkeley.edu
Published in Polymers
November 1, 2023
arXiv:2307.10139v3  [cond-mat.soft]  31 Oct 2023

macroscale properties of a product that is additively manufactured. However, the cost of
multiscale modeling may vary, especially when it is involved with molecular-scale simula-
tions.
Traditionally, in multiscale modeling of crystalline materials, this is overcome by
using a technique called the Cauchy-Born rule [4, 5], which is an approximation of molecu-
lar dynamics by using simplified molecular statics or by using phase field crystal method for
polycrystalline metals [6]. However, for semicrystalline or amorphous materials, due to the
lack of a definite crystal structure, full-scale molecular dynamics must be utilized, which will
significantly increase the cost of the multiscale simulation. This is because the macroscale
finite element method would require a molecular-level stress-strain relation at each quadra-
ture point for an arbitrarily given strain, and it is almost impossible to conduct concurrent
molecular dynamics simulations unless one has abundant computational resources.
The task at hand is to simulate the molecular-level stress-strain relation under arbitrary
strain and temperature with good accuracy, efficiency, and low cost. To solve this problem,
in the present work, we adopted a machine learning approach by developing an artificial
neural network (ANN) that is trained on a molecular dynamics (MD) data set, which can
predict the molecular-level mechanical material properties of polymeric materials.
Current efforts in machine learning-driven material property predictions involve a variety
of approaches. One common approach is to use features based on the material composition to
obtain structure and electronic properties, such as predicting the band gap of semiconductor
materials using convolutional neural networks [7] and predicting adsorption energies of high-
entropy alloys through deep neural networks [8]. In a recent study, standard feed-forward
neural networks are used with EAM-based MD simulations to model crystal plasticity in a
multiscale framework [5].
Additive manufacturing can use a wide range of materials, such as synthetic polymers,
metal alloys [9], and biomaterials. Industrial applications range from the automotive indus-
try to tissue engineering [10], and understanding the mechanical properties of such materials
is still an open topic. Our focus in this work is on polymers, for which new applications
emerge everyday, such as polyester membranes for biomedical applications [11] and geopoly-
mers used in the construction industry [12].
Polymeric materials have three different microstructural forms: crystal, amorphous, and
semicrystalline. As a starting point, we first develop an ANN to predict the mechanical
response of the anisotropic crystalline forms of polymers. The approach we presented can
be extended to include amorphous phases and will eventually be incorporated into the con-
stitutive relations of a multiscale finite element method for semicrystalline polymers. One of
the polymeric materials widely used in additive manufacturing is Polyamide12 (PA12), also
known as Nylon12, which is a synthetic polymer that is used in many industrial applications,
such as automotive parts, aerospace applications and medical components. An automotive
part manufactured using the multi-jet fusion process is shown in Figure 1.
2

Figure 1: 3D printed PA12 auto part via HP multi-jet fusion (Courtesy of Ford Motor Company).
PA12 has the chemical formula [-(CH2)11C(O)NH-]n as visualized in Figure 2. In recent
years, many 3D printed PA12 products have been fabricated, and they have shown some
outstanding material properties. Additively manufactured PA12 is a semicrystalline ma-
terial, in which the microstructure has a sandwich-like structure of alternating regions of
crystal and amorphous zones.
Figure 2: Polyamide12 molecules. Gray, white, blue and red spheres represent carbon, hydrogen, nitrogen
and oxygen atoms respectively. Dashed lines indicate the H bonds.
Its structural characterization has been extensively studied since the 1970s with x-ray
diffraction (XRD) experiments [13, 14] and with nuclear magnetic resonance (NMR) spec-
troscopy [15], which revealed that PA12 displays polymorphism and can have crystal phases
α, α′, γ and γ′. The most abundant phase is the γ form, which results from slow cooling
at atmospheric pressure, whereas the other phases require specific conditions such as rapid
quenching and/or high-pressure treatment. For the purposes of our study, we focus on the
γ crystal form.
2. Molecular dyanmics simulations
In this section, we describe the details of molecular dynamics simulations, such as the
preparation of initial configurations, the force field selection, and simulation procedures, and
we conduct a preliminary study.
2.1. System setup
We start by constructing the unit cell of the γ form PA12 crystal. The γ phase has a
pseudo-hexagonal monoclinic structure with the lattice parameters summarized in Table 1
3

[13, 14]. Using the atomistic coordinates and the lattice parameters from the experimental
literature [14], the unit cell of the γ phase is constructed. This monoclinic structure contains
four PA12 chains and is visualized in Figure 3. Note that the dashed lines indicate hydrogen
bonds and that the unit cell is periodic in all directions.
Lattice Parameters
a
4.79 ˚A
b
31.90 ˚A
c
9.58 ˚A
β
120◦
Space Group
P21/C
Table 1: Lattice Parameters for γ form PA12 crystal
(a)
(b)
Figure 3: Unit cell of the γ form PA12: (a) Monoclinic cell (b) Orthogonal transformation.
Polymer chains are aligned with the y-axis, and the unit cell represents a perfect crys-
talline system with infinite chain length and no defects. MD simulations of triclinic (non-
orthogonal) boxes are computationally expensive, due to the irregular partitioning of the
processor subdomain. To improve the efficiency, we transform the simulation box into an
orthogonal cell with chains aligned with the z-axis, which is depicted in Figure 3. The unit
cell is then duplicated by (8 × 4 × 2) in the (x, y, z) directions, respectively, to create a
supercell for MD simulations. The resulting model, which consists of around 9,500 atoms,
has dimensions [38.3˚A × 33.2˚A × 63.8˚A], is visualized in Figure 4.
(a)
(b)
Figure 4: Supercell of perfect PA12 crystals (a) View from x-y plane (b) View from y-z plane.
4

2.2. Force field selection
Force fields represent the interactions between atoms and molecules using a set of equa-
tions. In classical forms, force fields consist of empirical potentials that describe bonded
interactions (primary bonds, bond angles, and dihedrals) and non-bonded interactions (van
der Waals and electostatic). Choosing a suitable force field for the system under considera-
tion is a crucial part of molecular dynamics simulations.
Several empirical force fields have been used in the simulation of polyamides; some
popular examples being OPLS, CVFF, COMPASS, and DREIDING [16]. However, these
potentials are typically unable to model chemical reactions and cannot account for bond
dissociation. Hence, they are not the ideal choice for investigating the mechanical response
of the system in the context of fracture mechanics and rupture of polymer crystals, which
may involve the chain scission process [17, 18].
Reactive force fields, on the other hand, have been developed to simulate complex chem-
ical reactions and have been used successfully in deformation simulations that involve bond
cleavage. Once such a force field is ReaxFF, originally developed by van Duin [19], which
utilizes the so-called bond order formalism to describe chemical bonding. ReaxFF requires
no topology information, and it is easy to construct initial MD configurations since only the
atomistic coordinates are needed. ReaxFF specially treats weak hydrogen bonds with an
explicit energy term in the functional, which plays an important role in polymer systems.
The current implementation in LAMMPS utilizes the functional described in [20].
ReaxFF is parameterized for a wide range of materials through quantum mechanical
calculations [21] and has also been used in the simulation of polyamide crystals before
[22]. For our polymer system, we tested three such parameterizations [23, 24, 25]. The
test process involved relaxing the initial structure in the NPT ensemble and comparing
the resultant lattice parameters with the experimental values. Among these, the ReaxFF
parameterization by Mattson [24] yielded the best result; therefore, it was chosen as the
force field for this study.
2.3. Simulation details and preliminary analysis
Molecular dynamics simulations are performed using the Large-Scale Atomic/Molecular
Massively Parallel Simulator (LAMMPS) [26]. The simulations are run on Berkeley’s high-
performance computing cluster Savio using a [4 × 2 × 4] CPU grid. MD time steps are
chosen as 0.5 fs. Nos´e-Hoover thermostat and barostat [27] are used to control temperature
and pressure, respectively, with damping parameters chosen as 50 fs and 500 fs. Damp-
ing parameters were chosen according to the LAMMPS documentation, which recommends
temperature and pressure damping to be 100 and 1000 times the time step, respectively.
The initial structure is relaxed in the constant pressure and temperature (NPT) ensemble
at 300 K and 1 atm, where the pressure is controlled independently in all directions. We
observed that an NPT simulation for 50 ps was sufficient to reach equilibrium, as the lattice
parameters stabilized adequately at this point.
As a preliminary study and to investigate in detail the anisotropic mechanical response of
PA12 crystals, we constructed a larger MD cell with 38,000 atoms. After relaxation under
ambient conditions, we deform the system in different directions under uniaxial tension.
5

Uniaxial deformation is imposed by stretching the unit cell in one direction at a constant
strain rate and relaxing the other two dimensions with the NPT ensemble at 1 atm. For
this part of the study, we used slower strain rates and deformed the cell quasi-statically in a
step-by-step fashion as described in [28]. In this process, the MD cell is deformed to 1% of
its final stretch, relaxed in the NVT ensemble, and the stress is sampled and averaged over
5 ps intervals. These steps are repeated until rupture of the polymer chains is observed and
the resulting stress-strain behaviors are shown in Figure 5 for each direction.
(a) x-direction
(b) y-direction
(c) z-direction
Figure 5: Stress (MPa) versus Strain (engineering) behavior of PA12 in uniaxial tension.
In Figure 5, we observe that the system is highly anisotropic; crystal is significantly more
stiff in the z-direction, which is the direction of polymer chain alignment, and it is more
ductile in the other two directions. Interestingly, for the x-direction, Figure 5 (a) , there
was a remarkable increase in the elastic modulus once the strain reaches around 12%. We
explored this phenomenon to comprehend whether it involves a mechanically induced phase
transformation, by deforming the original monoclinic crystal supercell in the x-direction.
The resulting atomistic configurations before and after the change in elastic modulus are
visualized in Figure 6, in which we clearly observe a change in the microstructural configu-
rations.
(a) Before the elastic modulus change
(b) After the elastic modulus change
Figure 6: Snapshots of the atomistic configurations during deformation in the x-direction.
Upon additional analysis, we understood that the process is completely reversible and
the effect disappears once the MD cell is unloaded to its original state. Further investigation
may be required to draw a meaningful conclusion on the phenomenon.
6

3. Artificial neural network for constitutive law
In this section, we present a data-driven approach to model the hyperelastic constitutive
law of crystalline PA12, to be used in multiscale mechanics simulations. Our task is to
find the mapping between the deformation state and the resulting material response, using
the data obtained from the molecular dynamics simulations on an artificial neural network
(ANN). We discuss data collection, model selection, training phase, and predictions in detail.
3.1. Data collection and processing
In order to generate the data set to train the learning model, we performed MD simula-
tions by deforming the PA12 supercell in different directions with varying strain rates. For
the purposes of this study, we limit our attention to uniaxial and biaxial tensile deforma-
tions, although the presented methodology should be applicable to any deformation mode.
Using the findings of the preliminary study, Figure 5, we determined the final stretch limits
of the simulation box necessary in each direction and corresponding strain rate ranges, as
summarized in Table 2. In all simulations, the supercell is deformed for 10,000 steps with
a rate chosen from the prescribed ranges depending on the loading direction. Specifically,
we chose 15 evenly spaced values from the ranges in Table 2 and took their combinations
to obtain uniaxial and biaxial loading cases, resulting in 720 different MD simulations, each
having different final stretches and strain rates. Note that the ultimate strains would only
be reached at simulations which utilize the maximum strain rates.
Deformation Direction
x
y
z
Ultimate Strain
0.5
0.6
0.15
Strain Rate (10−6/fs)
[3.3, 50]
[4, 60]
[1, 15]
Table 2: Ultimate strain and resulting ranges of strain rates for each direction.
Each deformation simulation is run for 5 ps, and the Virial stress and the box dimensions
are sampled at 50 fs intervals.
Consequently, after running all the 720 simulations, we
collected a data set consisting of 72,720 data points. Each data point is 12 dimensional,
representing the deformation (6 components) and stress (6 components) states of the PA12
crystal. Note that the process described here involves remarkably high strain rates and short
simulation times, since it was not computationally feasible to conduct slower simulations and
collect a large data set at the same time.
The original data from MD simulations consist of box dimensions l = {lx, ly, lz} which
can be used to construct the deformation gradient F , and the stress measure we get is the
pressure tensor, known as the Virial stress. Virial stress has been shown to be equivalent to
continuum Cauchy stress σ [29]. In order to adopt the model into the continuum mechanics
framework, we need to transform the data set into the tensor quantities utilized in finite
deformation. To preserve material objectivity [30, 5], we chose the energetic conjugates right
Cauchy-Green tensor C and the second Piola-Kirchhoff (PK2) stress tensor S to represent
the deformation state and material response, respectively. Each of these second-order tensors
7

have nine components, but making use of the symmetry and Voigt notation we represent
them in the vector form as below.
C = [C11, C22, C33, C12, C13, C23]
(1)
S = [S11, S22, S33, S12, S13, S23]
(2)
Using the elementary relations of continuum mechanics, we can obtain the C and S
tensors as follows.
J = det F
(3)
C = F TF
(4)
S = JF −1σF −T
(5)
Now we can state our goal as finding the map,
Ψ : C →S
(6)
where Ψ encapsulates the constitutive model that we are going to approximate through
supervised learning.
Finally, we normalize our input data set to have a mean of zero and a standard deviation
of one, a process known as standardization. It is common practice in gradient-based learning
methods to standardize the data, which improves the performance of ANNs by helping to
solve the convergence issues of the backpropagation algorithm [31, 32]. Standardization can
be described as follows.
Cstd
ij
= Cij −ˆµij
ˆσij
for
i, j = 1, 2, 3.
(7)
where Cstd
ij
are the normalized components of the right Cauchy-Green tensor, ˆµij is the
sample mean and ˆσij is the sample standard deviation of the respective component.
3.2. Model selection and results
We adopt a fully connected feedforward network architecture to construct our regres-
sion ANN, which may be called a multilayer perceptron (MLP). As shown by the universal
approximation theorem, feedforward neural networks can approximate any continuous func-
tion, provided that they have at least one hidden layer, have enough neurons, and the
activation functions satisfy certain properties [33, 34]. Thus, we believe that an MLP is a
suitable choice to approximate the hyperelastic constitutive law. Keras [35] Python interface
of the TensorFlow [36] machine learning package is used to select and train our ANN model.
8

Our task is to find an approximation to the constitutive model defined in Equation(6).
Formally, we can express the learning problem as follows. Find
N(C, w) = ˆS ,
(8)
such that
w = argmin
w
L(S, ˆS) ,
(9)
where N is encodes the ANN, w are known as the weights of each neuron and L is a loss
function. The task in supervised learning is to find optimal weights w such that the metric
defined in the loss function is minimized.
To select the ANN model parameters known as hyperparameters, such as the number of
hidden layers, the number of neurons in each layer, the type of activation functions and the
learning rate of the gradient descent, we perform hyperparameter optimization. We chose
two candidate activation functions that are commonly used in regression, ReLu function and
its smooth approximate version known as the Softplus function.
ReLu : σ(x) = max(x)
Softplus : σ(x) = log(1 + ex)
(10)
For the loss function, we choose the mean squared error (MSE) of the PK2 stress:
LMSE(S, ˆS) = 1
n
n
X
i=1
||Si −ˆSi||2
2 ,
(11)
where S is the PK2 stress obtain from MD simulations, ˆS is the predicted stress from ANN
and n is the number of data points.
We tried two methodologies to select the best set of hyperparameters, the HyperBand al-
gorithm [37] and Bayesian Optimization with Gaussian Process [38]. Both algorithms would
pick the best parameters from a predefined set, which would give the lowest validation loss.
The set of parameters that we make the search is determined by preliminary analysis, where
the optimizer of the ANN is chosen as the Adam algorithm [39], which implements a version
of the stochastic gradient descent (SGD) method. Accordingly, we chose the following range
of parameters to perform hyperparameter tuning.
Hyperparameters
Hidden Layers
Neurons
Activation Function
Learning Rate
[2, 5]
[32, 256]
{ReLu, Softplus}
{10−1, 10−2, 10−3}
Table 3: Hyperparameter search grid
We start by partitioning the data into a random 80% - 20% train-test split. Then, we run
hyperparameter optimization using Hyperband and Bayesian Optimization methods in the
domain described in Table 3, leaving aside 20% of the training data to be used to compute
validation loss. For all models, the learning rate γ = 10−2 and the number of hidden layers
of four or five gave us the best results. For the rest of the hyperparameters, we investigated
the top ten models and chose the ones with the lowest complexity to reduce overfitting.
Resulting candidate models are summarized in Table 4.
9

Hyperband (1)
Bayesian (2)
Hyperband (3)
Bayesian (4)
Input Layer
6
6
6
6
Hidden Layer 1
192 × ReLu
64 × ReLu
160 × ReLu
224 × ReLu
Hidden Layer 2
32 × Softplus
32 × Softplus
64 × Softplus
96 × Softplus
Hidden Layer 3
32 × ReLu
256 × Softplus
32 × ReLu
64 × ReLu
Hidden Layer 4
64 × ReLu
32 × ReLu
128 Softplus
96 × Softplus
Hidden Layer 5
128 × ReLu
64 × ReLu
-
-
Output Layer
6 × Linear
6 ×Linear
6 × Linear
6 ×Linear
Validation Loss
15630
15026
14109
13538
Table 4: ANN architectures resulting from Hyperband method and Bayesian Optimization
The models summarized above are trained on the train data set for 1000 epochs, and
predictions are made on the test data to assess our final performance. The resulting train-
test history curves, in terms of MSE in PK2 stress (MPa), are presented in Figure 7. We
conclude that the ANNs are stable, there is no significant overfitting, and they perform well
against the test data set. The best model appears to be ANN-4, the rightmost column in
Table 4, and its architecture is schematically visualized in Figure 8.
Figure 7: Learning curves of the ANNS: Training and test loss (MPa) during training phase.
Finally, we tested ANN-4 against a new set of uniaxial tension MD simulations to observe
the performance of our models against the variance in the strain rate. Two of the simulations
utilized strain rates ˙ϵ1 = 5 × 10−6/fs and ˙ϵ2 = 10 × 10−6/fs, which are within the training
10

Figure 8: ANN-4 schematic representation [40].
interval defined in Table 7. Predictions from ANN-4 is compared with the MD results and
the resultant C33 versus S33 (MPa) relations are shown in Figure 9. The predictions in
the elastic range and the ultimate strength are in great agreement with the MD findings,
demonstrating the predictive power of the ML approach.
Figure 9: Predictions of ANN-4 for uniaxial tension in z-direction for a new set of simulations. The strain
rates are contained in the training range.
We consider two additional MD simulations that employed strain rates lying beyond
the training range, encompassing both extremes. These strain rates are defined as ˙ϵ3 =
0.5 × 10−6/fs (slower) and ˙ϵ4 = 30 × 10−6/fs (faster). The corresponding results are shown
in Figure 10, together with the MD results, for comparison. Although the slower rate led to a
slightly higher ultimate strength, remarkable agreement is observed within the elastic range.
Here, the ANN effectively captured intricate aspects of the loading path. The findings clearly
demonstrate the capacity of the model for generalization and robustness across various strain
rates, which makes it a promising candidate for effectively describing the constitutive laws
of crystalline polymers to be used in large-deformation FEM simulations.
11

Figure 10: Predictions of ANN-4 for uniaxial tension in z-direction for a new set of simulations. The strain
rates are beyond the range of the training data.
In order to better quantify model uncertainty of the ANN, we performed an error analysis.
We use the same four sets of simulations with different strain rates as previously shown in
Figures 9-10. We consider the full six components of the prediction, namely the second
Piola-Kirchhoff tensor ˆS, and investigate how the error evolves with the deformation by
comparing it to the MD result S. Since the use of MSE does not make sense here, we use
the percentage error defined below.
Percentage Error = 100 × ||S −ˆS||2
||S||2
,
(12)
Results are presented in Figure 11, with respect to the deformation. Note that we used
the tensor component C33 to represent axial deformation, to be consistent with the previous
discussions. We observe that the error remains close to zero for the elastic region, except for
the initial loading regime. When the material is further deformed and starts to yield, that is,
for C33 > 1.20, we start to see a significant increase in error. This is expected as the failure
mechanism and the material response beyond yielding would involve high uncertainty. Out-
of-domain data ˙ϵ3 result in a significant error, especially during the initial loading phase. On
the other hand, ˙ϵ4 outcomes are similar to those of the in-range data. From these findings
we infer that the model performs better when dealing with faster loading rates, and there is
a high uncertainty within the initial loading and the failure regions. Further analysis may
be required to draw a final conclusion as the data here were rather limited.
Figure 11: Percentage error, as defined in Equation 12, for different strain rates.
12

4. Conclusions
In this study, we have developed an artificial neural network to model the mechanical
response of crystalline polymers based on molecular dynamics simulations. Initial configu-
rations are generated to model PA12 in γ crystal form. ReaxFF was our choice for the force
field, and MD simulations are performed under uniaxial and biaxial tensile deformations to
generate a data set for the learning model.
ANN architecture is selected through hyperparameter tuning algorithms and carefully
calibrated using the training set. The training and validation process produced the best
model to be ANN-4, which is proven to be robust and accurate with no significant overfitting.
The best model is tested against different strain rates, which covers above and beyond the
loading rate range of the training set. The results demonstrated the predictive power and
generalization capacity of our approach, even with strain rates that are much slower or faster
than the original data.
The presented methodology proved to be an efficient way of modeling the microstruc-
turally informed constitutive relation of crystalline polymers, which would be used in macroscale
FEM simulations. Namely, we presented an approach to accurately predict the mapping
between the right Cauchy-Green (C) and second PK2 stress (S) tensors, which shall be uti-
lized to compute the strain energy density of large deformation problems. Once the model
is trained, we can simply treat it as a black box for computing the strain energy at arbitrary
quadrature points and time steps, corresponding to the current deformation state of the
material.
There are some caveats that need further attention. As detailed in Section 2.3, there
may be a mechanically induced phase transformation of PA12, which may depend on the
particular additive manufacturing method and process parameters such as temperature and
printing speed. Furthermore, we only considered uniaxial and biaxial tensile deformations in
our training set. For general loading conditions, such as pure shear, compression, and torsion,
the artificial neural network will need more data and the associated ML training procedure
may become more complicated and expensive. Nevertheless, the approached outlined in this
work can easily be extended to any deformation mode by obtaining the corresponding MD
data set and repeating the ML process.
It should be noted that our current investigation was limited to the fully crystalline form
of PA12 for demonstration purposes. The actual material components consist of semicrys-
talline structures wherein the microstructure comprises amorphous and crystalline regions.
However, the MD and ML methodologies presented can be easily adopted for amorphous
domains. Additionally, considering larger simulation cells, having longer relaxation windows
and adopting slower strain rates may be necessary to simulate more accurate and realistic
scenarios. These matters will be further investigated and reported in a separate study.
5. Acknowledgements
We acknowledge the support from the University Grant by Ford Motor Company. Caglar
Tamur gratefully acknowledges the financial support for his graduate studies and research
by the Fulbright Scholarship Program.
13

References
[1] D. L´opez Barreiro, J. Yeo, A. Tarakanova, F.J. Martin-Martinez, and M.J. Buehler. Multiscale modeling
of silk and silk-based biomaterials a review. Macromolecular bioscience, 19(3):1800253, 2019.
[2] S. Sharafi, M.H. Santare, J. Gerdes, and S.G. Advani. A multiscale modeling approach of the fused
filament fabrication process to predict the mechanical response of 3d printed parts. Additive Manufac-
turing, 51:102597, 2022.
[3] M. Jamshidian, N. Boddeti, D.W. Rosen, and O. Weeger. Multiscale modelling of soft lattice metama-
terials: Micromechanical nonlinear buckling analysis, experimental verification, and macroscale consti-
tutive behaviour. International Journal of Mechanical Sciences, 188:105956, 2020.
[4] S. Urata and S. Li. Higher order cauchy born rule based multiscale cohesive zone model and prediction
of fracture toughness of silicon thin films. International Journal of Fracture, 203:159–181, 2017.
[5] Dana Bishara and Shaofan Li. A machine-learning aided multiscale homogenization model for crystal
plasticity: application for face-centered cubic single crystals. Computational Mechanics, pages 1–17,
2023.
[6] Yuhong Zhao, Kexin Liu, Haibin Zhang, Xiaolin Tian, Qinglong Jiang, Vignesh Murugadoss, and Hua
Hou. Dislocation motion in plastic deformation of nano polycrystalline metal materials: a phase field
crystal method study. Advanced Composites and Hybrid Materials, 5(3):2546–2556, 2022.
[7] Wissam A Saidi, Waseem Shadid, and Ivano E Castelli. Machine-learning structural and electronic
properties of metal halide perovskites using a hierarchical convolutional neural network. npj Computa-
tional Materials, 6(1):36, 2020.
[8] Wissam A Saidi. Emergence of local scaling relations in adsorption energies on high-entropy alloys. npj
Computational Materials, 8(1):86, 2022.
[9] Jun Wang, Zengxi Pan, Yangfan Wang, Long Wang, Lihong Su, Dominic Cuiuri, Yuhong Zhao, and
Huijun Li. Evolution of crystallographic orientation, precipitation, phase transformation and mechani-
cal properties realized by enhancing deposition current for dual-wire arc additive manufactured ni-rich
niti alloy. Additive Manufacturing, 34:101240, 2020.
[10] Yuanhang Xu, Feiyang Zhang, Weijie Zhai, Shujie Cheng, Jinghua Li, and Yi Wang. Unraveling of
advances in 3d-printed polymer-based bone scaffolds. Polymers, 14(3):566, 2022.
[11] Yi Wang, Weijie Zhai, Junhan Li, Haotian Liu, Chong Li, and Jinghua Li.
Friction behavior of
biodegradable electrospun polyester nanofibrous membranes. Tribology International, 188:108891, 2023.
[12] Hossein Khorshidi, Chunwei Zhang, Elham Najafi, and Marziyeh Ghasemi.
Fresh, mechanical and
microstructural properties of alkali-activated composites incorporating nanomaterials: A comprehensive
review. Journal of Cleaner Production, page 135390, 2022.
[13] Gianna Cojazzi, Annamaria Fichera, Carmine Garbuglio, Viscardo Malta, and Roberto Zannetti. The
crystal structure of polylauryllactam (nylon 12). Die Makromolekulare Chemie: Macromolecular Chem-
istry and Physics, 168(1):289–301, 1973.
[14] Kazuo Inoue and Sadao Hoshino. Crystal structure of nylon 12. Journal of Polymer Science: Polymer
Physics Edition, 11(6):1077–1089, 1973.
[15] Lon J Mathias and C Greg Johnson.
Solid-state nmr investigation of nylon 12.
Macromolecules,
24(23):6114–6122, 1991.
[16] Sanjay Krishna, I Sreedhar, and Chetan M Patel. Molecular dynamics simulation of polyamide-based
materials–a review. Computational Materials Science, 200:110853, 2021.
[17] Lu´ıs Antonio Pinheiro, Marcelo Aparecido Chinelatto, and Sebasti˜ao Vicente Canevarolo. The role of
chain scission and chain branching in high density polyethylene during thermo-mechanical degradation.
Polymer Degradation and Stability, 86(3):445–453, 2004.
[18] Firas Awaja, Shengnan Zhang, Manoj Tripathi, Anton Nikiforov, and Nicola Pugno. Cracks, microc-
racks and fracture in polymer structures: Formation, detection, autonomic repair. Progress in Materials
Science, 83:536–573, 2016.
[19] Adri CT Van Duin, Siddharth Dasgupta, Francois Lorant, and William A Goddard. Reaxff: a reactive
force field for hydrocarbons. The Journal of Physical Chemistry A, 105(41):9396–9409, 2001.
[20] Kimberly Chenoweth, Adri CT Van Duin, and William A Goddard. Reaxff reactive force field for
14

molecular dynamics simulations of hydrocarbon oxidation.
The Journal of Physical Chemistry A,
112(5):1040–1053, 2008.
[21] T.P. Senftle, S. Hong, M. M. Islam, S. B. Kylasa, Y. Zheng, Y. K. Shin, C. Junkermeier, R. Engel-
Herbert, M. J. Janik, H. M. Aktulga, et al. The reaxff reactive force-field: development, applications
and future directions. npj Computational Materials, 2(1):1–14, 2016.
[22] Quanpeng Yang, Wenjun Li, Spencer T Stober, Adam B Burns, Manesh Gopinadhan, and Ashlie
Martini. Molecular dynamics simulation of the stress–strain behavior of polyamide crystals. Macro-
molecules, 54(18):8289–8302, 2021.
[23] Malgorzata Kowalik, Chowdhury Ashraf, Behzad Damirchi, Dooman Akbarian, Siavash Rajabpour, and
Adri CT Van Duin. Atomistic scale analysis of the carbonization process for c/h/o/n-based polymers
with the reaxff reactive force field. The Journal of Physical Chemistry B, 123(25):5357–5367, 2019.
[24] Thomas R Mattsson, J Matthew D Lane, Kyle R Cochrane, Michael P Desjarlais, Aidan P Thompson,
Flint Pierce, and Gary S Grest. First-principles and classical molecular dynamics simulation of shocked
polymers. Physical Review B, 81(5):054103, 2010.
[25] Weiwei Zhang and Adri CT Van Duin. Improvement of the reaxff description for functionalized hy-
drocarbon/water weak interactions in the condensed phase. The Journal of Physical Chemistry B,
122(14):4083–4092, 2018.
[26] Aidan P Thompson, H Metin Aktulga, Richard Berger, Dan S Bolintineanu, W Michael Brown, Paul S
Crozier, Pieter J in’t Veld, Axel Kohlmeyer, Stan G Moore, Trung Dac Nguyen, et al.
Lammps-
a flexible simulation tool for particle-based materials modeling at the atomic, meso, and continuum
scales. Computer Physics Communications, 271:108171, 2022.
[27] Denis J Evans and Brad Lee Holian. The nose–hoover thermostat. The Journal of chemical physics,
83(8):4069–4074, 1985.
[28] Dundar E Yilmaz and Adri CT van Duin. Investigating structure property relations of poly (p-phenylene
terephthalamide) fibers via reactive molecular dynamics simulations. Polymer, 154:172–181, 2018.
[29] Arun K Subramaniyan and CT Sun. Continuum interpretation of virial stress in molecular simulations.
International Journal of Solids and Structures, 45(14-15):4340–4346, 2008.
[30] Faisal As’ ad, Philip Avery, and Charbel Farhat.
A mechanics-informed artificial neural network
approach in data-driven constitutive modeling. International Journal for Numerical Methods in Engi-
neering, 123(12):2738–2759, 2022.
[31] Y. LeCun, L. Bottou, G. B. Orr, and K. M¨uller. Efficient backprop. In Neural networks: Tricks of the
trade, pages 9–50. Springer, 2002.
[32] J. Sola and J. Sevilla. Importance of input data normalization for the application of neural networks
to complex industrial problems. IEEE Transactions on nuclear science, 44(3):1464–1468, 1997.
[33] Kurt Hornik, Maxwell Stinchcombe, and Halbert White. Multilayer feedforward networks are universal
approximators. Neural networks, 2(5):359–366, 1989.
[34] Kurt Hornik.
Approximation capabilities of multilayer feedforward networks.
Neural networks,
4(2):251–257, 1991.
[35] Fran¸cois Chollet et al. Keras. ttps://keras.io, 2015.
[36] Mart´ın Abadi, Ashish Agarwal, Paul Barham, Eugene Brevdo, Zhifeng Chen, Craig Citro, Greg S.
Corrado, Andy Davis, Jeffrey Dean, Matthieu Devin, Sanjay Ghemawat, Ian Goodfellow, Andrew Harp,
Geoffrey Irving, Michael Isard, Yangqing Jia, Rafal Jozefowicz, Lukasz Kaiser, Manjunath Kudlur, Josh
Levenberg, Dandelion Man´e, Rajat Monga, Sherry Moore, Derek Murray, Chris Olah, Mike Schuster,
Jonathon Shlens, Benoit Steiner, Ilya Sutskever, Kunal Talwar, Paul Tucker, Vincent Vanhoucke, Vijay
Vasudevan, Fernanda Vi´egas, Oriol Vinyals, Pete Warden, Martin Wattenberg, Martin Wicke, Yuan
Yu, and Xiaoqiang Zheng. TensorFlow: Large-scale machine learning on heterogeneous systems, 2015.
Software available from tensorflow.org.
[37] L. Li, K. Jamieson, G. DeSalvo, A. Rostamizadeh, and A. Talwalkar. Hyperband: A novel bandit-based
approach to hyperparameter optimization. The Journal of Machine Learning Research, 18(1):6765–
6816, 2017.
[38] T. O’Malley, E. Bursztein, J. Long, F. Chollet, H. Jin, L. Invernizzi, et al. Kerastuner, 2019.
15

[39] Diederik P Kingma and Jimmy Ba. Adam: A method for stochastic optimization. arXiv preprint
arXiv:1412.6980, 2014.
[40] Alexander LeNail. Nn-svg: Publication-ready neural network architecture schematics. J. Open Source
Softw., 4(33):747, 2019.
16
