Position: Evaluation of ML Resource Utilization Requires
Model Life Cycle Assessment
Jared Fernandez 1 Clara Na 1 Yonatan Bisk 1 Constantine Samaras 2 3 Emma Strubell 1
Abstract
Proper accounting of the energy requirements
and environmental impact of artificial intelligence
(AI) systems is necessary for researchers, develop-
ers, policy makers, and users to assess the barriers
to building systems at scale. With the growing
complexity of pipelines and underlying infrastruc-
ture needed to develop and deploy AI systems,
previous approaches for evaluating AI efficiency
which focus on the costs of a single training run
or an individual inference prediction are no longer
sufficient. In this position paper, we enunciate the
need for applying life cycle assessment to eval-
uate the costs of the machine learning model
development and deployment pipeline to prop-
erly account for the required resources and down-
stream impact. Life cycle assessments enable the
incorporation of costs across the full life cycle
of an AI system and its underlying infrastructure,
from the embodied costs associated with the phys-
ical computing hardware through the operational
costs in training and inference.
1. Introduction
As with any emerging technology, an understanding of the
resource utilization and byproducts is necessary to both
provision the necessary infrastructure and assess their down-
stream societal impacts. Artificial Intelligence is no dif-
ferent, and its resource requirements remain growing but
largely uncertain. The current scaling paradigm, in which
large language model performance continues to benefit from
increasing scales of computation, has led to growth projec-
tions which predict data centers will consume more than
1Language Technologies Institute, Carnegie Mellon Univer-
sity, Pittsburgh, PA, USA 2Department of Civil and Environmental
Engineering, Carnegie Mellon University, Pittsburgh, PA, USA
3Wilton E. Scott Institute for Energy Innovation, Carnegie Mel-
lon University, Pittsburgh, PA, USA. Correspondence to: Jared
Fernandez <jaredfern@cmu.edu>.
Proceedings of the 43 rd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Seoul, South Korea. PMLR 306, 2026. Copyright 2026
by the author(s).
10% of the total U.S. energy demand by 2030 (Green et al.,
2024; Shehabi et al., 2024). However, the certainty of such
estimates is highly variable and annual load growth expecta-
tions vary by more than 4 times (Aljbour et al., 2024).
Reducing the uncertainty in these projections is necessary
to ensure that power generation can be properly provisioned
while also avoiding placing strain on existing grid infras-
tructure or increasing utility prices to individual ratepayers
(Joint Legislative Audit and Review Commission, 2024).
Proper measurement enables informed decision making for
governments and industry institutions which have commit-
ted hundreds of billions of dollars to investments in comput-
ing hardware and energy infrastructure needed to support
the development and deployment of large-scale machine
learning models with costs rivaling those of “Big Science”
projects (OpenAI, 2025b; Bobrowsky, 2025; Isaac, 2025;
Smith, 2025; Cai & Sophia, 2025; Parashar et al., 2023).
However, despite the increasing costs of AI and the breadth
of stakeholders affected by AI systems, the methodologies
we use to evaluate the resource requirements of machine
learning models and their socio-economic impacts have not
evolved in kind. Existing approaches for evaluating the
resource consumption of ML models are often limited to
measuring the cost of a marginal step in the development
or deployment life cycle of an ML model – i.e. the cost
of an individual training run or inference prediction. Mea-
surement of the resource utilization of a system requires
aggregation and attribution of those used across all stages
in both its production and use, and such approaches focused
on the cost of a single constituent stage can fail to account
for the effects of efficiency improvements on one stage of a
system’s life cycle on the resources in another stage.
Fortunately, techniques for analyzing the resource require-
ments and downstream impacts over the lifetime of manufac-
tured products are well established in the field of industrial
ecology; namely, with life cycle assessment (ISO 14040,
ISO 14044 (ISO 14040:2006; ISO 14044:2006)). Life cycle
assessment (LCA) quantifies the impact of a product by de-
composing resource consumption and emissions across the
stages of manufacture, use, and disposal; and across types of
resources (e.g. energy, carbon emissions, human health im-
pacts). The costs associated with previous lifecycle stages,
1
arXiv:2606.07632v1  [cs.LG]  31 May 2026

Position: Evaluation of ML Resource Utilization Requires Model Life Cycle Assessment
such as hardware manufacture and model training, are to-
taled and amortized through use. Life cycle assessment has
been used in semiconductor manufacturing and computing
hardware research to quantify the embodied and operational
carbon cost of fabrication, recycling, and use of physical
hardware (Gupta et al., 2021; Wu et al., 2022; Schneider
et al., 2025; Ji et al., 2024; Gupta et al., 2022). However,
systematic methods for applying LCA to machine learning
models are nascent.
In this paper, we enunciate the need for life cycle assess-
ment to evaluate the efficiency and environmental impact
of machine learning models through development and
deployment by:
1. Presenting the existing landscape for evaluating ML
efficiency and resource use, and its limitations (§2)
2. Outlining how these issues can be addressed via ap-
plication of life cycle assessment to machine learning
models (§3)
3. Discussing the benefits provided and insights provided
by applying LCA to ML models (§5)
4. Providing alternative perspectives on AI’s resource
requirements (§4)
5. Stating what is needed to enabled life cycle assessment
of ML models (§6).
2. Limitations in Existing Approaches to
Evaluating ML’s Resource Needs
In response to the growing resource consumption of ma-
chine learning models, there has been a significant increase
in scientific inquiry into both (1) the evaluation of ML’s
resource consumption and environmental impact, and (2)
the design of efficient ML methods; as reflected in a myriad
of research surveys (Menghani, 2023; Treviso et al., 2023;
Tay et al., 2022; Wan et al., 2023; Sui et al., 2025) and publi-
cation venues dedicated to the topic (Rezagholizadeh et al.,
2024; Dao et al., 2025; Wang et al., 2024b; Sadat Moosavi
et al., 2023). Such efforts are necessary first steps towards
understanding the overall resource requirements of AI and
ML systems. However, existing efforts have often relied
on assumptions which are not reflective of the real-world
systems and workloads which underpin modern AI systems.
2.1. Reliance on Proxy Measures of Efficiency.
A wide range of efficiency metrics have motivated research
in the design of efficient machine learning algorithms, model
architectures, and computer systems. For example, service-
level objectives (SLOs) have been used to optimize cloud
serving settings where models are deployed to support
latency-sensitive APIs. Whereas the hardware limitations of
mobile and edge settings have yielded model compression
methods which reduce the memory overheads of models.
At the same time, theoretical investigations, which are often
based on proxy metrics for efficiency such as FLOPs, have
yielded parameter-, data-, and sample-efficient ML archi-
tectures and training algorithms. Although such research
yields improvements on these efficiency proxy metrics, such
proxies are often not highly correlated with more tangi-
ble measures such as latency and energy (Dehghani et al.,
2022b; Fernandez et al., 2023). For measures of resource
utilization to be informative for stakeholders seeking to stan-
dardize or account for resource consumption, reporting must
correspond to the real-world quantities of interest.
2.2. Failure to Account for Growing Complexity in the
ML Model Life Cycle.
Previous efforts to account for resource usage and environ-
mental impacts of machine learning models have mainly
focused on the resources consumed for a single stage of the
model life cycle – e.g. the energy or water use of large-scale
model training (Strubell et al., 2020; Patterson et al., 2021;
Faiz et al., 2024; Morrison et al., 2025), the marginal im-
pacts of individual inference predictions (Luccioni et al.,
2024; Fernandez et al., 2025a; Patel et al., 2024; Wu et al.,
2025; Ding & Shi, 2024; Nguyen et al., 2024), or the em-
bodied costs from manufacture of computing hardware (Li
et al., 2025b; 2024b). However, focusing on individual
stages of the model life cycle is insufficient to measure the
total resources and environmental impact associated with
the choice to build a new machine learning model or AI
system.
To evaluate the resource demands of AI system, it is neces-
sary to account and attribute the resources consumed across
all stages of development and deployment. Conducting such
an evaluation is increasingly difficult as the complexity of
modern models continues to grow with bespoke deployment
and development pipelines. For instance, state-of-the-art
large language models (Figure 1), require multiple stages
of pre- and post-training, leverage auxiliary models for syn-
thetic data, distillation, and reward modeling; rely on an
assortment of inference-time algorithms, and can be de-
ployed across variable hardware platforms. Each stage of
the growing model pipeline introduces further complexity
to decision-making about development and deployment -
as well as additional challenges to accounting of models’
resource consumption and environmental impact.
2.3. Sector-Wide Projections are Not Grounded in Real
Computational Workloads.
Concerns around the rising power demands of AI data cen-
ters have led to the rise of various studies that estimate and
project growth in data center energy use (Shehabi et al.,
2024; Green et al., 2024; Aljbour et al., 2024). To obtain
projections on energy use, such studies rely on estimates of
future chip shipments and energy efficiency to forecast the
2

Position: Evaluation of ML Resource Utilization Requires Model Life Cycle Assessment
Material 
Extraction
Manufacture
Use & 
Maintenance
End of Life
Cradle
Grave
Gate
Data Collection 
&  Generation
Pretraining
Experimentation
Finetune
Reward 
Modeling
Supervised 
Fine-tuning
Direct 
Preference 
Optimization
Long-Context 
Pretraining
Pretraining
Generative 
Inference
Updating &
Retraining
In-Context 
Learning
Tool 
Use
Document 
Retrieval
Chain-of-Thought
 Reasoning
Self
Refinement
GPT-2
Llama 3: Pre-Training
Llama 3: Post-Training
Figure 1. LCA enables aggregation across ML model development and deployment life cycles of increasing complexity. The pre- and
post-training pipelines of modern LLMs (e.g. OLMo with the Tulu post training recipe Walsh et al. (2025); Lambert et al. (2025)) have
significantly more stages than classical train-test settings; and a larger variety of methods for conducting inference (Welleck et al., 2024).
total demands of computing hardware. Sector-level analysis
is critical for providing information to developers of elec-
trical grid infrastructure. With infrastructure lead times of
multiple years, accurate sector projections enables grid in-
frastructure to be built out to support the increased capacity
demands of data centers, often in excess.
However, these studies rely on assumptions about hardware
utilization and energy efficiency at a level of abstraction
that obfuscates individual workloads. These assumptions
make it impossible to assess for the impact of models de-
veloped and deployed by machine learning researchers and
practitioners; or to evaluate the impact of model efficiency
improvements or design choices.
3. Life Cycle Assessment for ML Models
As described in the previous section, existing efforts to mea-
sure the resource requirements of ML are limited: often
relying on coarse-grained sector-level estimates, failing to
measure the real-world resource of interest, or only repre-
senting a component of the total costs of an AI system rather
than incorporating the total costs across the development
and deployment life cycle.
As a means to address these limitations, we believe that
evaluation of the resource demands of ML models re-
quires life cycle assessment. Life Cycle Assessment (LCA;
(Curran, 2006)) provides a methodological basis to deter-
mine the environmental and social impacts of a product by
accounting for the required resources and environmental
impacts of a manufactured product or service through re-
source extraction, material processing, manufacture, use and
disposal (i.e. from cradle to grave).
Concretely, LCA’s are standardized and defined across two
separate ISO standards. ISO 14040 specifies LCA’s concep-
tual framework, whereas ISO 14044 specified the technical
requirements for conducting an LCA (ISO 14040:2006; ISO
14044:2006). 1 For conducting a ML model LCA, we direct
practitioners to the practices outlined in ISO 14044.
At the core of LCA is a functional unit which defines a
quantitative reference for the value provided by a process,
which can be compared across potential systems. In turn, a
system can be defined that produces the functional unit of
interest in relation to resources and emissions.
In this section, we demonstrate how life cycle assessment
can be used to enable to more holistic accounting of machine
learning models’ total resource consumption and environ-
mental impacts for producing a functional unit. We examine
the four stages of LCA as defined in ISO standards: Goal
Definition and Scoping, Life Cycle Inventory, Life Cycle
Impact Assessment, and Interpretation.
3.1. Goal Definition and Scoping
The first stage of an LCA defines a functional unit corre-
sponding to the service being delivered by an AI system and
its constraints, and the system boundaries which isolate the
processes and resource flows encompassed in the study.
3.1.1. FUNCTIONAL UNITS FOR MACHINE LEARNING
Depending on the stakeholder conducting an LCA, the func-
tional unit and the process of interest may vary. For example,
institutional developers of large foundation models may be
interested in the environmental impact and cost associated
1Specifically, ISO 14040 specifies the stages of an LCA. By
contrast, ISO 14044 provides requirements and guidance on how
to conduct an LCA (e.g. considerations for determining system
boundaries, factors for assessing the quality of data).
3

Position: Evaluation of ML Resource Utilization Requires Model Life Cycle Assessment
with the development of families of models, and the func-
tional unit could be defined as a “set of trained foundation
models for a language task.” Downstream users may be
concerned with the costs associated with using machine
learning models, where a functional unit can be defined as a
“processed batch of queries to a machine learning model.”
While prior work has performed direct measures of the
operational costs of conducting model training and infer-
ence, reported values are not comparable when they are not
grounded in standardized functional units or consistent sys-
tem boundaries. For instance, ambiguity in the workloads
served render the resulting energy measurements of differ-
ent model providers, such as OpenAI and Google, difficult
to compare (Altman, 2025; Elsworth et al., 2025).
3.1.2. PRODUCT SYSTEMS FOR MODERN MACHINE
LEARNING MODEL LIFE CYCLES.
After identifying a functional unit for study, a candidate
product system which produces the functional unit is mod-
eled; defined from: material extraction, manufacture, use
and maintenance, through disposal. Input resources and
output emissions and waste byproducts are associated with
each stage, with system boundaries which specify which
resource flows to include in the evaluation.
In the case of machine learning models, LCA enables aggre-
gation of costs across the full product system encompassing
both the resources consumed during hardware manufacture
(i.e. embodied costs) as well as those consumed during
the development and deployment of the model (i.e. op-
erational costs). Historically, the process of developing
and deploying models followed a simple process of train-
ing and performing validation on small sets of in-domain
i.i.d. datasets. However, modern ML models are developed
using complex pipelines with rapid iterative experimenta-
tion processes and multiple stages of training (See Figure
1). Development now encompasses additional stages, such
as: neural architecture search, automated machine learn-
ing and experimentation, and long-context pretraining, as
well as continuous retraining of models during development
(Tornede et al., 2023; Sangarya et al., 2024) — each requir-
ing additional resources. Likewise, the variety of methods
for model inference has grown, as new paradigms have
emerged which shift computation from training to infer-
ence to attain higher performance, e.g. via chain-of-thought
reasoning, self-refinement, tool use, retrieval-augmented
generation, and in-context learning (Welleck et al., 2024).
As with functional units, LCA requires consistency in sys-
tem boundaries which would otherwise render evaluations
incomparable. For instance, differences in the inclusion of
Scope 2 offsite water utilization contributed to estimations
of water use in by LLMs differing by orders of magnitude
(Li et al., 2022; Elsworth et al., 2025).
3.2. Life Cycle Inventory
The life cycle inventory stage describes and quantifies the
environmental flows associated with the functional unit (Na-
tional Academies of Sciences, Engineering, and Medicine,
2022). LCA provides an extensible framework which inven-
tories resource and byproduct flows associated with embod-
ied costs (e.g. rare earth minerals, PFAS, CFCs) (Elgamal
et al., 2025a;b); as well as those incurred during operational
use such as energy, water, carbon emissions and air pollution
(Wu et al., 2022; Morrison et al., 2025; Han et al., 2024).
3.3. Life Cycle Impact Assessment
Using the quantified costs determined through the life cycle
inventory, the total environmental impact of ML models can
be determined by translating the inventoried resources into
associated impact categories, such as the contribution to
global warming from increased emissions; ozone depletion
from CFCs; or human health impacts resulting from water
depletion, noise, or air quality pollution.
Although LLM developers have begun to report on en-
ergy requirements and carbon dioxide emission equivalents
(CO2e), the downstream environmental impact remains
largely unreported (Dubey et al., 2024; Walsh et al., 2025).
Fortunately, life cycle impact assessment provides standard
conversions and characterization factors for converting in-
ventoried resources into their associated net environmental
impact, such as the U.S. Environmental Protection Agency’s
Tool for the Reduction and Assessment of Chemical and
other environmental Impacts (TRACI) (Bare, 2002; 2011).
3.4. Interpretation
For researchers, model developers, and policy makers to
utilize the results of an LCA, it is necessary to contextualize
and interpret the results of the investigation, by: (1) identify-
ing significant issues with the inventory and assessment; (2)
evaluating the completeness, sensitivity, and consistency of
data; and (3) providing conclusions and recommendations
based on the impact assessment.
Identification of the significant issues (i.e. the components
of the life cycle that have the greatest impact on the to-
tal result) enables location of resource bottlenecks in ma-
chine learning models, whether it be the costs associated
with hardware fabrication, the upfront costs associated with
model training, or the marginal costs of individual infer-
ences. Once the inventory and impact assessment have been
validated, the LCA’s results enable estimation of the down-
stream environmental impact of the full machine learning
model life cycle– such as to identify which model design
choices yield the most efficient system for providing the
specified functional unit (e.g., watts per batched inference).
4

Position: Evaluation of ML Resource Utilization Requires Model Life Cycle Assessment
106
107
108
109
1010
1011
1012
Experimentation
Experimentation
Training
Embodied Hardware
Breakeven w/Inefficeint Batching
Breakeven w/Efficeint Batching
Embodied HW
Training
Inference Requests
104
105
106
107
Cost (kg CO2e)
(a) Aggregate costs: Total environmental impact of models in-
corporates factors from all stages of model life cycle.2Utilizing
efficient serving optimizations increases the number of func-
tional units produced under a fixed resource budget.
107
109
1011
1013
Inference Requests
10−10
10−8
10−6
10−4
10−2
Amortized Per-Inference
Cost (kg CO2e)
Inference (Ineﬃcient)
Inference (Optimal)
Train + Experimentation + Embodied
(b) Per-inference costs: For the functional unit defined as a
batch of processed requests, the upfront embodied and oper-
ational costs are amortized with use and asymptotically ap-
proach the marginal cost of inference.
Figure 2. CO2e emissions of OLMo2 7b training and inference (Morrison et al., 2025; Walsh et al., 2025). Increasing inference efficiency
via offline batching reduces the unit cost, as does amortization of embodied costs over model use. Decomposition of the resource use
across life cycle stages enables identification of the significant issues (i.e. the life cycle stage which maximally contributes to total costs).
3.5. Case Study: Comparing the Effects of LLM System
Design Choices with LCA
As an example, we consider an example LCA with a func-
tional unit corresponding to a batch of processed examples
by a large language model (See Figure 2a) with total costs
equivalent to the sum of operational inference costs with
both upfront training and embodied costs. For our example,
computing the cost to produce the functional unit (CFU)
requires consideration of not only the marginal cost of infer-
ence computation but also the amortized costs of upstream
training and hardware manufacturing associated with the
inference. More precisely, we consider a simple time-share
approach for attributing GPU embodied costs, in which the
hardware’s manufacturing costs are attributed to training
and inference loads based on the length of the workload
as fraction of the hardware’s usable lifetime. However, we
note that the efficacy of different attribution approaches for
embodied costs remains open research problems.
CFU =CPer Inference + Hardware Utilization Time × CEmbodied
Hardware Lifespan
+ CExperimentation + CTraining
Total Lifetime Inferences
Accordingly, to compute the cost per functional unit, the
practitioner must minimally account and attribute the em-
bodied costs of hardware, operational costs of training, ex-
perimentation, and per-request inference. This information
can be obtained through direct first-party disclosures from
hardware manufacturers (NVIDIA, 2025b;a) for embodied
costs; or measured directly in-workload through freely avail-
able GPU and CPU utilities (e.g. Nvidia nvidia-smi and
DCGM; or Intel VTuner) to account for operational cost.
In addition to providing baselines for the total resources
required by a machine learning model, LCA can be used to
evaluate and provide comparisons across multiple systems
that produce the same functional unit, and the relative impact
of efficiency improvements to stages of the model life cycle.
For modern LLM serving, there exists a variety of design
choices that affect the total efficiency and resource consump-
tion, including: parallelization strategies, machine learning
software frameworks, cluster scheduling algorithms, and
choices in the underlying hardware accelerators. Life cycle
assessment enables comparisons of the cost per functional
unit when varying such configurations in the context of the
full model life time. For instance, shown in Figure 2b, sim-
ply increasing the efficiency of LLM serving with increased
batching to produce our example functional unit improves
hardware utilization, and enables more requests to be served
under fixed carbon emissions budgets.
Furthermore, life cycle assessment enables the study of effi-
ciency optimizations that affect multiple stages of the model
life cycle. The advent of multi-stage training and inference-
time computing yield complex interactions across stages
of model development and use which allow for tradeoff of
resources between constituent stages. For instance, “rea-
soning” models (such as DeepSeek-R1, OpenAI GPT-o1,
and Gemini) can utilize substantially more resources during
inference to attain higher performance on difficult tasks that
would otherwise require additional domain-specific training.
Alternatively, continual or domain-specific pretraining may
extend a model’s utility, delaying the need for full model
retraining and/or further offsetting the initial training cost.
2Following Morrison et al. (2025), we ground our inference
efficiency estimates in ShareGPT data and likewise assume a 4-
year lifetime for GPU hardware.
5

Position: Evaluation of ML Resource Utilization Requires Model Life Cycle Assessment
LCA can enable analysis of the trade-offs of these methods,
relative efficiencies, and resource-optimal settings.
Without systematic quantification as part of an LCA, an
understanding of the relative magnitudes of efficiency mea-
sures across the entire model lifecycle, under different as-
sumptions about the shape of the model lifecycle, remains
largely elusive - in Figure 2b, we see that the total per-
inference cost is extremely sensitive to the total “lifespan”
of the model until it is used at least tens of billions of times.
4. Alternative Views
While we believe LCA provides a comprehensive methodol-
ogy for evaluating the resource requirements and environ-
mental impact of ML models, we acknowledge critiques
and alternative views for evaluating AI’s resource use.
Increasing Costs of AI Will Be Offset by Efficiency
Improvements in Algorithms, Systems, and Hardware.
Historically, the energy efficiency of computing hardware
has doubled approximately every 1.57 years (Koomey et al.,
2010). Likewise, the energy efficiency of AI in particular
has benefited from additional improvements in software
frameworks and model architectures which together are
poised to lead to overall reductions in AI’s resource de-
mands (Patterson et al., 2022; Oviedo et al., 2025).
However, the increased efficiency of computing hardware
has given way to rebound effects; such as Jevons’ paradox
(Jevons, 1866) in which lower cost of use yields increased
uptake, leading to increased total resource consumption
despite higher utilization and reductions in resources con-
sumed per-unit of resource (Luccioni et al., 2025).
Under the assumption of Jevons’ paradox and increased ca-
pability and profitability,3 ML demand will expand to con-
sume all resources that can be allocated to it. In this setting,
managing ML’s resource consumption becomes less a ques-
tion of reducing resource use, than one of resource alloca-
tion: Given a limited set of resources (e.g. datacenter energy,
land), what is the most effective allocation of those resources
in order to maximize output? There is a need for methodolo-
gies and data enabling analysis of such resource allocations,
e.g. between training and inference workloads, across dif-
ferent model types (task-specific, general-purpose), tasks,
deployment scenarios, and hardware.
LCA of Computing Hardware is More Informative than
Model-Based LCA.
As datacenters are the physical enti-
ties that consume resources and perform the computation of
3For instance, Microsoft’s CEO recently referenced Jevons’
paradox to reassure stakeholders that ML efficiency improvements
will lead to “skyrocket[ing]” demand for AI, alongside significant
investments in energy infrastructure, such as Microsoft’s bid to
re-commission the nuclear reactor at Three Mile Island in order to
power an AI data center.
an ML model, they should be the object of study for LCAs
as performed in Gupta et al. (2021); NVIDIA (2025b;a);
Schneider et al. (2025). Analysis of the environmental costs
associated with hardware provides insight into the efficiency
of the underlying computing platform and informs decision-
making around hardware provisioning and building of phys-
ical infrastructure.
Hardware-based accounting alone does not provide insight
into the resource requirements and associated emissions
of the machine learning model which is often developed
and deployed across multiple heterogeneous hardware plat-
forms over the course of its lifetime. For instance, an LCA
focused on hardware may examine the carbon emissions
associated with the production of computing hardware or
the construction of a data center (e.g., the tCO2e attributed
to manufacturing a GPU server). While analyses are crit-
ical to developers of physical infrastructure, they do not
inform model developers and deployers on the resource uti-
lization or environmental impact of the AI system itself.
By contrast, model LCAs study the resource requirements
associated with the computing workload which utilizes the
underlying physical hardware; and provide insight into the
tCO2e attributed to serving an LLM request or to train a
model.
As opposed to evaluating the resources consumed by the
physical infrastructure, the resource consumption of across
a model lifecycle is more interpretable to both model de-
velopers understanding the costs of their deployment; and
consumers, as the model itself is providing the primary
functionality of AI systems.
LCA is Unnecessary as ML Resource Consumption is
Concentrated in a Single Life Cycle Stage.
Depending
on the use case of an AI system, the total resource require-
ments can be disproportionately concentrated in a single life
cycle stage. For instance, in the case of the largest frontier
models, the frequency and scale of inference leads opera-
tional inference costs to dominate as the primary contributor
to resource consumption – with industry players such as
Meta and Google reporting that inference makes up 70% and
60% of their AI power consumption, respectively (Oviedo
et al., 2025; Wu et al., 2022; Patterson et al., 2022). In such
cases, totaling the marginal costs of inference may be suf-
ficient for determining total costs. Conversely, experimen-
tation and training largely dominate resource consumption
for AI researchers as the systems are not deployed at scale
and would otherwise require billions of served inferences to
amortize the upfront costs of development (Luccioni et al.,
2023; Morrison et al., 2025).
Although the impact of fixed embodied and training costs
may be amortized through use, the upfront costs of modern
ML models remain substantial such that they require de-
ployment at the scale of billions of inference requests before
6

Position: Evaluation of ML Resource Utilization Requires Model Life Cycle Assessment
inference begins to exceed the costs of training (See Fig-
ure 2b). LCA additionally provides a robust framework for
evaluating emerging applications for AI computation, which
may introduce additional stages beyond existing ones and in-
troduce additional computation and resource requirements;
such as with multi-agent workflows.
LCAs are Infeasible Due to Information Unavailability.
LCAs can often rely on information that is disclosed by
hardware manufacturers and model providers. As a result,
LCA calculations and estimates are often dependent on
proprietary information that private corporations may be
reluctant to provide to maintain competitive advantage. In
such settings, LCAs can still be conducted in the presence
of missing data using data from representative averages or
secondary sources. As a first step, LCA practitioners and
model evaluators could use available disclosures in model
tech reports, press releases, and public communications
to provide initial approximations of resource utilization.
For instance, Google has disclosed aggregate statistics for
energy and water use of their Gemini model (Schneider et al.,
2025); and OpenAI has disclosed total tokens processed at
developer conferences (Ciaccia, 2025). While such statistics
may not provide the fine-grained information needed to
identify the costs associated with an individual workload,
the estimations provided by such a model LCA provide a
potential range of resource utilizations for an average or
aggregate workload.
That being said, the data challenges for ML model LCAs
may be becoming less of an issue as information is increas-
ingly available via: voluntary disclosures (e.g. disclosure of
hardware embodied costs for GPUs by NVIDIA (NVIDIA,
2025a;b)), publicly accessible databases (e.g. EcoInvent
(Wernet et al., 2016)), and government mandates (e.g. re-
porting requirements in the EU AI act (European Parliament
and Council of the European Union, 2024)). Likewise, con-
ducting direct measurements for ML practitioners is increas-
ingly accessible as many power measurement utilities (e.g.,
nvidia-smi) have existing integrations with commonly
used monitoring tools (e.g., wandb).
5. Benefits of LCAs in Machine Learning
Life cycle assessment enables analysis of the ML model
ecosystem for a broad group of stakeholders, including:
machine learning researchers and practitioners, users of AI
systems, energy and data center providers, policy makers,
regulators, and community groups. We discuss insights and
decision-making that is enabled should the ML community
develop comprehensive LCAs.
LCA Provides Transparency to Consumers and Enter-
prise Customers.
Eco-feedback programs, such as the the
United States Environmental Protection Agency’s Energy
Star, have been estimated to reduce consumers’ energy use
by 5 trillion kWh, saving 4 billion metric tons of CO2e (U.S.
Environmental Protection Agency, 2026). While such labels
exist for physical appliances, consumers lack information
on their individual impact and footprint associated with their
use of AI-enabled systems.
LCA of ML models provides a method for quantifying the
costs associated with a consumer’s use of AI systems, and
can enable them to assess the resource footprint associated
with their individual choices in AI use. LCAs enable con-
sumers to adjust their utilization to prioritize sustainability,
such as by individual reductions in AI usage or opting for
less resource intensive models.
LCA Enables Evaluation of the Effectiveness of Effi-
ciency Research.
Existing evaluations of machine learn-
ing models rely on a fragmented assortment of efficiency
and task performance benchmarks (Reddi et al., 2020; Matt-
son et al., 2020; Tschand et al., 2025; Wang et al., 2024a;
Yao et al., 2025; Hendrycks et al., 2021). Machine learning
algorithms and systems research has addressed efficiency
concerns through the development of: model architectures
(Wang et al., 2025), efficient serving configurations (Patel
et al., 2024; Stojkovic et al., 2025; Shi et al., 2024; Wu et al.,
2025; Li et al., 2025b; Stojkovic et al., 2024), improved par-
allelization algorithms (Hsia et al., 2024; Fernandez et al.,
2025b; You et al., 2023; Chung et al., 2024), adaptive in-
ference methods(Li et al., 2024a), power efficient hardware
(Patterson et al., 2021; Jouppi et al., 2017), and carbon-
aware and demand response (Xing et al., 2023). However,
a lack of standardized functional units and treatment of
spatio-temporal uncertainty produces research that relies
on inconsistent hardware platforms, serving requirements,
model architectures, task domains and performance con-
straints, and metrics for system efficiency – with academic
and industry estimates sometimes differing by orders of
magnitude (Elsworth et al., 2025).
Life cycle assessment grounds efficiency evaluations with
functional units and system boundaries defined in terms of
the end-to-end use case, which are more easily compared
across systems. As seen in Figure 2b, LCA enables compar-
ative analysis of different system design choices, and deter-
mination of which optimizations provided by the research
community translate to reductions in real-world resource use
and environmental impacts. As such, ML researchers can
use LCAs to better identify efficiency bottlenecks across the
model life cycle and motivate new lines of research which
target lifetime reductions in efficiency. For instance, LCA’s
could be used to compare resource utilization across stages
of training to evaluate whether full retraining is more ef-
ficient than alternatives which extend the usable life of a
deployed large language model such as continual training
which utilizes additional training compute post-deployment
or retrieval-augmented generation systems which require
additional computation during inference.
7

Position: Evaluation of ML Resource Utilization Requires Model Life Cycle Assessment
LCA Empowers Developers of AI Models and Power
Infrastructure to Effectively Allocate Resources.
Fur-
ther growth in machine learning is becoming constrained
by fundamental limitations in the availability of computing
hardware and the energy necessary to power them. Life
cycle assessment provides insight into the relative resource
consumption and intensity of model training and deploy-
ment. By identifying significant issues (see §3.4), LCA
can be used by machine learning researchers to identify
research questions and directions addressing elements of
the model life cycle with highest resource consumption and
emissions that present the largest bottlenecks to efficiency
and opportunities for improvement.
Additionally, LCA enables industry stakeholders to provi-
sion and allocate resources so that machine learning systems
meet target efficiency and environmental goals — not just
in terms of the marginal cost of training or inference, but
contextualized within the whole machine learning life cycle.
Understanding the relative scales of demand for different
life cycle stages enables infrastructure developers to project
and accommodate the resources requirements of different
workloads (e.g. adapting compute and electrical infrastruc-
ture to handle synchronous training or online inference).
LCA Informs Standards for AI Resource Utilization
for Policy Makers.
As the use of AI has grown and en-
ergy, water, and other impacts have materialized in many
communities, policy makers at federal and local levels are
increasingly interested in assessing and mitigating impacts.
The energy, carbon, water, air pollutant, noise, and other
impacts of AI data centers has driven interest from pol-
icy makers and communities for solutions. Lawmakers in
multiple countries have introduced bills and passed laws
calling for methods to evaluate the resource requirements
and sustainability of AI and establish standardized reporting
systems (NIST, 2023; 118th United States Congress, 2024;
The White House, 2025; European Parliament and Council
of the European Union, 2024).
As a commonly used methodology in the assessment of
manufactured products in other domains, LCA provides
a ready-to-use framework for policy makers and develop-
ers of minimum efficiency standards, along with access
to LCA practitioners capable of conducting such analyses.
Transparently defining scope and functional units can enable
guidelines for voluntary or regulated impacts reporting from
industry stakeholders, and inform policy maker decisions.
For example, the U.S. Inflation Reduction Act (117th United
States Congress, 2022) specifies the use of LCA and a model
developed by Argonne National Laboratory as the method
required to estimate the life cycle greenhouse emissions
of hydrogen production to determine eligibility for federal
incentives. As policymakers consider both incentives and
regulations to minimize the environmental impacts of AI
and ML, LCA can enable model comparison and account
for both impact and performance. These incentives and
regulations can inform industry decision-making regarding
model development to account for resource requirements
and external impact.
LCA Improves Accuracy and Completeness in Resource
Estimation and Projections.
While the speed and com-
puting requirements of machine learning research have
grown with time, the methods required to evaluate the effi-
ciency and resource consumption of the work have not kept
up. It is necessary to develop a methodological foundation
for grounded assessments of cost.
As shown in Figure 2b, LCA can be used to allocate re-
source usage to components, and to estimate the relative
importance of the constituent stages of hardware fabrication,
model training and inference. Additionally, by applying
LCA across different types of resources, researchers can
account for machine learning’s environmental burden along
with other key impacts commonly associated with costs of
computing such as raw material extraction (Boyd, 2011), wa-
ter usage(Li et al., 2025a), public health (Han et al., 2024),
and per- or polyfluoroalkyl substances (PFAS) (Lee et al.,
2025; Elgamal et al., 2025a).
Furthermore, LCA enables researchers to estimate future
machine learning systems and provides a tool to under-
stand their potential environmental impact, longterm trends,
and rebound effects across a range of scenarios (Luccioni
et al., 2025). Evaluating hypothetical systems with differing
assumptions enables projection of the impact of: further
scaling of ML systems (Hoffmann et al., 2022; Rae et al.,
2021), automation of the development process with autoML
(Tornede et al., 2023), or alternative hardware platforms
such as in edge or mobile settings (Patterson et al., 2024).
6. Call to Action: Enabling LCA for ML
Finally, we describe essential components and data gaps
to be addressed to enable LCA as a standard practice for
analyzing efficiency in machine learning.
User-Centric Evaluations and Metrics
Variability in the
evaluation settings used to characterize efficiency and per-
formance in ML models hinders fair comparison between
studies and models. Moreover, while standard efficiency
metrics may be measurable and reproducible (e.g. model
parameter count, FLOPs), they often fail to map directly to
practical user-side requirements such as latency constraints,
financial cost, or energy budget (Dehghani et al., 2022a;
Fernandez et al., 2023; 2025a). For functional units to corre-
spond to user needs, efficiency benchmarks should not only
measure the hardware utilization or speed but be grounded
in the performance measured demanded by the use case.
8

Position: Evaluation of ML Resource Utilization Requires Model Life Cycle Assessment
Transparency in Reporting from Model Developers.
As
observed in our example in Figure 2b, the cost of a func-
tional unit of inference is directly dependent on: the serving
configurations, hardware selection, and ML system design
decisions. Likewise, cost of inference is dependent on the
total number of inferences served, a necessary datapoint
needed for appropriate attribution of resulting implications
to the amortizable training and embodied costs.
While it is increasingly common for developers to release
information on the total energy use and estimated carbon
emissions of model pretraining, such measurements are
often limited to the final training run and fail to account for
development costs, the embodied costs of hardware, or the
cost and frequency of inference. For downstream users and
regulators to accurately assess the cost of ML models, it is
necessary for hardware manufacturers and large-scale model
developers to release information on the embodied resources
and emissions associated with hardware fabrication; as well
as the scale, frequency, and settings for model inference.
Fortunately, there is precedent for both industry-led trans-
parency and joint initiatives between governments and indus-
try model providers. For instance, model providers currently
provide self-reporting through the Foundation Model Trans-
parency Index and with Model Cards for frontier model
releases (Bommasani et al., 2024; Mitchell et al., 2019).
Likewise, both the U.S.’s Center for AI Standards and In-
novation and the U.K.’s AI Safety Institute collaborate with
model providers OpenAI and Anthropic to conduct pre-
release auditing of their model’s capabilities (Anthropic,
2025; OpenAI, 2025a; National Institute of Standards and
Technology (NIST), 2025). In addition to evaluating for
model capabilities, we advocate for a voluntary inclusion of
details around the resource requirement and deployment for
model LCA in model cards and pre-release audits.
Standardization of LCA Reporting by Public Institu-
tions.
As industry and private institutions may lack in-
centives to disclose resource utilization due to competitive
advantage and trade secrets, government organizations can
work to define LCA-based measurements for AI efficiency
evaluations. For instance, both the EU AI Act and the
White House’s AI Action Plan outline the need for reporting
requirements for model providers for general purpose AI
(GPAI) models (European Parliament and Council of the
European Union, 2024; The White House, 2025). Standards
setting organizations and regulators in these regions can de-
fine reporting protocols and standards for AI systems, such
as the European Commission or European Committee for
Standardization; and the National Institute of Standards and
Technology or the American National Standards Institute,
respectively. Concretely, the EU has already mandated re-
porting of technical details, including model efficiency, for
GPAI models to appropriate government agencies by 2027
(See the EU AI Act Code of Practice: Transparency).
Improved Granularity in Metrics and Monitoring Tools.
Energy consumption extends beyond the GPU hardware
accelerator, including other components of the comput-
ing stack such as the CPU, memory, disk, and intercon-
nects (Dodge et al., 2022; McAllister et al., 2024). How-
ever, existing reporting is often limited to GPU-only power
draw (Dubey et al., 2024; Strubell et al., 2019); or re-
lies on approximations of the energy use upper-bounded
by hardware thermal design power (TDP) rather than em-
pirical direct measurements. Furthermore, existing tool-
ing struggles to measure power usage due to processor-to-
processor variability and insufficient granularity in sampling
frequency (Courty et al., 2024; Verdecchia et al., 2023; Yang
et al., 2023). To perform LCA for ML models, direct per-
component measurements of resource utilization is needed
for all associated computation.
Increased Research Support and Interdisciplinary Col-
laboration.
Life cycle assessment is fundamentally in-
terdisciplinary and requires the machine learning research
community to pursue collaboration with other fields. In this
work, we primarily examine case studies for the energy use
and carbon emissions of ML models. However, it is neces-
sary to engage with researchers upstream and downstream
of the machine learning model development and deployment
ecosystem to understand the full impact in other capacities.
For instance, computer systems experts can provide insight
into the efficiency of the underlying computing architec-
tures; and semiconductor researchers can provide insight
into the resources required for fabrication and disposal. Ad-
ditionally, it is necessary to engage with communities di-
rectly affected by model use, such as through collaboration
with environmental science and public health researchers
(Han et al., 2024; Li et al., 2022). Interpretation and action
based on results of an LCA is made possible cross-cutting
collaborations with domain experts and stakeholders.
Finally, establishing LCA as an accepted practice for use
with machine learning models requires the support of and
adoption by the research community. Our hope is that ma-
chine learning researchers will find nuanced evaluation of
practical efficiency and environmental impact to be a com-
pelling and promising research direction.
Acknowledgments
This work was supported by the National Science Founda-
tion Grant 2326610 and the Graduate Research Fellowship
Program under Grant No DGE2140739. Any opinions, find-
ings, conclusions or recommendations expressed in this ma-
terial are those of the author(s) and do not necessarily reflect
the views of the National Science Foundation. This research
has been partially supported by Microsoft Corporation as
part of the Keio CMU partnership.
9

Position: Evaluation of ML Resource Utilization Requires Model Life Cycle Assessment
References
117th United States Congress. Inflation reduction act of
2022. Public Law 117-167, 2022.
118th United States Congress. Artificial intelligence envi-
ronmental impacts act of 2024. Senate Bill 3732, 2024.
Aljbour, J., Wilson, T., and Patel, P. Powering intelligence:
Analyzing artificial intelligence and data center energy
consumption. EPRI White Paper no. 3002028905, 2024.
Altman, S. The gentle singularity. Sam Altman’s Blog, June
2025. URL https://blog.samaltman.com/t
he-gentle-singularity. Accessed: 2026-01-28.
Anthropic. Strengthening our safeguards through collabo-
ration with us caisi and uk aisi, September 2025. URL
https://www.anthropic.com/news/stren
gthening-our-safeguards-through-colla
boration-with-us-caisi-and-uk-aisi.
Bare, J. Traci 2.0: the tool for the reduction and assess-
ment of chemical and other environmental impacts 2.0.
Clean Technologies and Environmental Policy, 13:687–
696, 2011.
Bare, J. C. Traci: The tool for the reduction and assessment
of chemical and other environmental impacts. Journal of
industrial ecology, 6(3-4):49–78, 2002.
Bobrowsky, M. Meta spending to soar on ai, massive data
center. Wall Street Journal, 2025.
Bommasani, R., Klyman, K., Longpre, S., Xiong, B.,
Kapoor, S., Maslej, N., Narayanan, A., and Liang, P.
Foundation model transparency reports. In Proceedings
of the AAAI/ACM Conference on AI, Ethics, and Society,
volume 7, pp. 181–195, 2024.
Boyd, S. B.
Life-cycle assessment of semiconductors.
Springer Science & Business Media, 2011.
Cai, K. and Sophia, D. M. Alphabet plans massive capex
hike, reports cloud revenue growth slowed. Reuters, 2025.
Chung, J.-W., Gu, Y., Jang, I., Meng, L., Bansal, N., and
Chowdhury, M. Reducing energy bloat in large model
training. In Proceedings of the ACM SIGOPS 30th Sym-
posium on Operating Systems Principles, pp. 144–159,
2024.
Ciaccia, C. Openai ’dominating’ consumer AI token con-
sumption, Anthropic wins enterprise: Barclays, October
2025. URL https://seekingalpha.com/new
s/4505254-openai-dominating-consume
r-ai-token-consumption-anthropic-win
s-enterprise-barclays. Accessed: 2026-05-29.
Courty, B., Schmidt, V., Luccioni, S., Goyal-Kamal, Mari-
onCoutarel, Feld, B., Lecourt, J., LiamConnell, Saboni,
A., Inimaz, supatomic, L´eval, M., Blanche, L., Cru-
veiller, A., ouminasara, Zhao, F., Joshi, A., Bogroff, A.,
de Lavoreille, H., Laskaris, N., Abati, E., Blank, D.,
Wang, Z., Catovic, A., Alencon, M., Michal Stechly,
Bauer, C., de Araujo, L. O. N., JPW, and MinervaBooks.
mlco2/codecarbon: v2.4.1, May 2024. URL https:
//doi.org/10.5281/zenodo.11171501.
Curran, M. A. Life-cycle assessment: principles and prac-
tice. National Risk Management Research Laboratory,
Office of Research and Development, U.S. Environmental
Protection Agency, 2006.
Dao, T., Fu, D. Y., Ryabinin, M., Hesslow, D., Arora, S.,
Yang, S., Biderman, D., Chen, B., Mirhoseini, A., and
Liang, P. (eds.). Third Workshop on Efficient Systems
for Foundation Models at International Conference on
Machine Learning, Vancouver, Canada, 2025.
Dehghani, M., Tay, Y., Arnab, A., Beyer, L., and Vaswani,
A. The efficiency misnomer. In International Conference
on Learning Representations, 2022a. URL https://
openreview.net/forum?id=iulEMLYh1uR.
Dehghani, M., Tay, Y., Arnab, A., Beyer, L., and Vaswani,
A. The efficiency misnomer. In International Conference
on Learning Representations, 2022b. URL https://
openreview.net/forum?id=iulEMLYh1uR.
Ding, Y. and Shi, T. Sustainable llm serving: Environmen-
tal implications, challenges, and opportunities. In 2024
IEEE 15th International Green and Sustainable Com-
puting Conference (IGSC), pp. 37–38. IEEE Computer
Society, 2024.
Dodge, J., Prewitt, T., Tachet des Combes, R., Odmark, E.,
Schwartz, R., Strubell, E., Luccioni, A. S., Smith, N. A.,
DeCario, N., and Buchanan, W. Measuring the carbon
intensity of ai in cloud instances. In Proceedings of the
2022 ACM conference on fairness, accountability, and
transparency, pp. 1877–1894, 2022.
Dubey, A., Jauhri, A., Pandey, A., Kadian, A., Al-Dahle,
A., Letman, A., Mathur, A., Schelten, A., Yang, A., Fan,
A., et al. The llama 3 herd of models. arXiv preprint
arXiv:2407.21783, 2024.
Elgamal, M., Carmean, D., Ansari, E., Zed, O., Peri, R.,
Manne, S., Gupta, U., Wei, G.-Y., Brooks, D., Hills, G.,
et al.
Cordoba: Carbon-efficient optimization frame-
work for computing systems. In 2025 IEEE International
Symposium on High Performance Computer Architecture
(HPCA), pp. 1289–1303. IEEE, 2025a.
10

Position: Evaluation of ML Resource Utilization Requires Model Life Cycle Assessment
Elgamal, M., Mahmoud, A., Wei, G.-Y., Brooks, D., and
Hills, G. Modeling pfas in semiconductor manufacturing
to quantify trade-offs in energy efficiency and environ-
mental impact of computing systems. arXiv preprint
arXiv:2505.06727, 2025b.
Elsworth, C., Huang, K., Patterson, D., Schneider, I., Se-
divy, R., Goodman, S., Townsend, B., Ranganathan, P.,
Dean, J., Vahdat, A., et al. Measuring the environmental
impact of delivering ai at google scale. arXiv preprint
arXiv:2508.15734, 2025.
European Parliament and Council of the European Union.
Regulation (eu) 2024/1689 of 13 june 2024 laying down
harmonised rules on artificial intelligence (artificial intel-
ligence act) and amending regulation (ec) no 1236/2005
and directive (eu) 2019/1937, July 2024. URL https:
//eur-lex.europa.eu/eli/reg/2024/1689
/oj/eng.
Faiz, A., Kaneda, S., Wang, R., Osi, R. C., Sharma, P., Chen,
F., and Jiang, L. Llmcarbon: Modeling the end-to-end
carbon footprint of large language models. In The Twelfth
International Conference on Learning Representations,
2024.
Fernandez, J., Kahn, J., Na, C., Bisk, Y., and Strubell, E.
The framework tax: Disparities between inference effi-
ciency in nlp research and deployment. In Proceedings
of the 2023 Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural
Language Processing, pp. 1588–1600, 2023.
Fernandez, J., Na, C., Tiwari, V., Bisk, Y., Luccioni, S.,
and Strubell, E. Energy considerations of large language
model inference and efficiency optimizations. In Che,
W., Nabende, J., Shutova, E., and Pilehvar, M. T. (eds.),
Proceedings of the 63rd Annual Meeting of the Associ-
ation for Computational Linguistics (Volume 1: Long
Papers), pp. 32556–32569, Vienna, Austria, July 2025a.
Association for Computational Linguistics. ISBN 979-
8-89176-251-0. doi: 10.18653/v1/2025.acl-long.1563.
URL https://aclanthology.org/2025.ac
l-long.1563/.
Fernandez, J., Wehrstedt, L., Shamis, L., Elhoushi, M.,
Saladi, K., Bisk, Y., Strubell, E., and Kahn, J. Efficient
hardware scaling and diminishing returns in large-scale
training of language models. Transactions on Machine
Learning Research, 2025b. ISSN 2835-8856. URL ht
tps://openreview.net/forum?id=p7jQEf
3wlh.
Green, A., Tai, H., Noffsinger, J., and Sachdeva, P. How
data centers and the energy sector can sate ai’s hunger for
power. McKinsey and Company, 2024.
Gupta, U., Kim, Y. G., Lee, S., Tse, J., Lee, H.-H. S., Wei,
G.-Y., Brooks, D., and Wu, C.-J. Chasing carbon: The elu-
sive environmental footprint of computing. In 2021 IEEE
International Symposium on High-Performance Com-
puter Architecture (HPCA), pp. 854–867. IEEE, 2021.
Gupta, U., Elgamal, M., Hills, G., Wei, G.-Y., Lee, H.-
H. S., Brooks, D., and Wu, C.-J. Act: Designing sus-
tainable computer systems with an architectural carbon
modeling tool. In Proceedings of the 49th Annual In-
ternational Symposium on Computer Architecture, pp.
784–799, 2022.
Han, Y., Wu, Z., Li, P., Wierman, A., and Ren, S. The
unpaid toll: Quantifying the public health impact of ai.
arXiv preprint arXiv:2412.06288, 2024.
Hendrycks, D., Burns, C., Basart, S., Zou, A., Mazeika, M.,
Song, D., and Steinhardt, J. Measuring massive multitask
language understanding. Proceedings of the International
Conference on Learning Representations (ICLR), 2021.
Hoffmann, J., Borgeaud, S., Mensch, A., Buchatskaya, E.,
Cai, T., Rutherford, E., de Las Casas, D., Hendricks,
L. A., Welbl, J., Clark, A., et al.
Training compute-
optimal large language models. In Proceedings of the
36th International Conference on Neural Information
Processing Systems, pp. 30016–30030, 2022.
Hsia, S., Golden, A., Acun, B., Ardalani, N., DeVito, Z.,
Wei, G.-Y., Brooks, D., and Wu, C.-J. Mad-max beyond
single-node: Enabling large machine learning model ac-
celeration on distributed systems. In 2024 ACM/IEEE
51st Annual International Symposium on Computer Ar-
chitecture (ISCA), pp. 818–833. IEEE, 2024.
Isaac, M. Meta to increase spending to $65 billion this year
in a.i. push. New York Times, 2025.
ISO 14040:2006. Environmental management – Life cycle
assessment – Principles and framework, 2006.
ISO 14044:2006. Environmental management – Life cycle
assessment – Requirements and guidelines, 2006.
Jevons, W. S. The coal question. In The Economics of
Population, pp. 193–204. Routledge, 1866.
Ji, S., Yang, Z., Chen, X., Cahoon, S., Hu, J., Shi, Y., Jones,
A. K., and Zhou, P. Scarif: Towards carbon modeling of
cloud servers with accelerators. In 2024 IEEE Computer
Society Annual Symposium on VLSI (ISVLSI), pp. 496–
501. IEEE, 2024.
Joint Legislative Audit and Review Commission. Data Cen-
ters in Virginia. Technical Report 598, Commonwealth
of Virginia, 2024.
11

Position: Evaluation of ML Resource Utilization Requires Model Life Cycle Assessment
Jouppi, N. P., Young, C., Patil, N., Patterson, D., Agrawal,
G., Bajwa, R., Bates, S., Bhatia, S., Boden, N., Borchers,
A., et al. In-datacenter performance analysis of a tensor
processing unit. In Proceedings of the 44th annual inter-
national symposium on computer architecture, pp. 1–12,
2017.
Koomey, J., Berard, S., Sanchez, M., and Wong, H. Impli-
cations of historical trends in the electrical efficiency of
computing. IEEE Annals of the History of Computing, 33
(3):46–54, 2010.
Lambert, N., Morrison, J., Pyatkin, V., Huang, S., Ivison, H.,
Brahman, F., Miranda, L. J. V., Liu, A., Dziri, N., Lyu, S.,
Gu, Y., Malik, S., Graf, V., Hwang, J. D., Yang, J., Bras,
R. L., Tafjord, O., Wilhelm, C., Soldaini, L., Smith, N. A.,
Wang, Y., Dasigi, P., and Hajishirzi, H. Tulu 3: Pushing
frontiers in open language model post-training, 2025.
URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2411.15124.
Lee, J. C., Smaoui, S., Duffill, J., Marandi, B., and Varza-
kas, T. Forever chemicals pfas global impact and activ-
ities, cascading consequences of colossal systems fail-
ure: Long-term health effects, food-systems, eco-systems.
2025.
Li, B., Jiang, Y., Gadepally, V., and Tiwari, D. Sprout:
Green generative ai with carbon-efficient llm inference.
In Proceedings of the 2024 Conference on Empirical
Methods in Natural Language Processing, pp. 21799–
21813, 2024a.
Li, P., Yang, J., Islam, M. A., and Ren, S. Making ai less
“thirsty”: Uncovering and addressing the secret water
footprint of ai models. Artificial intelligence (AI), pp. 4,
2022.
Li, P., Yang, J., Islam, M. A., and Ren, S.
Making ai
less’ thirsty’. Communications of the ACM, 68(7):54–61,
2025a.
Li, Y., Hu, Z., Choukse, E., Fonseca, R., Suh, G. E., and
Gupta, U. Ecoserve: Designing carbon-aware ai inference
systems. arXiv preprint arXiv:2502.05043, 2025b.
Li, Y. L., Graif, O., and Gupta, U. Towards carbon-efficient
llm life cycle. In Proceedings of the 3rd Workshop on
Sustainable Computer Systems (HotCarbon), 2024b.
Luccioni, A. S., Viguier, S., and Ligozat, A.-L. Estimating
the carbon footprint of bloom, a 176b parameter language
model. Journal of Machine Learning Research, 24(253):
1–15, 2023.
Luccioni, A. S., Strubell, E., and Crawford, K. From effi-
ciency gains to rebound effects: The problem of jevons’
paradox in ai’s polarized environmental debate. In Pro-
ceedings of the 2025 ACM Conference on Fairness, Ac-
countability, and Transparency, pp. 76–88, 2025.
Luccioni, S., Jernite, Y., and Strubell, E. Power hungry
processing: Watts driving the cost of ai deployment? In
Proceedings of the 2024 ACM conference on fairness,
accountability, and transparency, pp. 85–99, 2024.
Mattson, P., Cheng, C., Diamos, G., Coleman, C., Micike-
vicius, P., Patterson, D., Tang, H., Wei, G.-Y., Bailis, P.,
Bittorf, V., et al. Mlperf training benchmark. Proceedings
of Machine Learning and Systems, 2:336–349, 2020.
McAllister, S., Kazhamiaka, F., Berger, D. S., Fonseca, R.,
Frost, K., Ogus, A., Sah, M., Bianchini, R., Amvrosiadis,
G., Beckmann, N., et al. A call for research on stor-
age emissions. In Proceedings of the 3rd Workshop on
Sustainable Computer Systems (HotCarbon), 2024.
Menghani, G. Efficient deep learning: A survey on making
deep learning models smaller, faster, and better. ACM
Computing Surveys, 55(12):1–37, 2023.
Mitchell, M., Wu, S., Zaldivar, A., Barnes, P., Vasserman,
L., Hutchinson, B., Spitzer, E., Raji, I. D., and Gebru, T.
Model cards for model reporting. In Proceedings of the
conference on fairness, accountability, and transparency,
pp. 220–229, 2019.
Morrison, J., Na, C., Fernandez, J., Dettmers, T., Strubell, E.,
and Dodge, J. Holistically evaluating the environmental
impact of creating language models. In The Thirteenth
International Conference on Learning Representations,
2025. URL https://openreview.net/forum
?id=04qx93Viwj.
National Academies of Sciences,
Engineering,
and
Medicine. Current Methods for Life-Cycle Analyses of
Low-Carbon Transportation Fuels in the United States.
2022.
National Institute of Standards and Technology (NIST). ”ac-
celerating ai innovation through measurement science”,
December 2025. URL https://www.nist.gov/b
logs/caisi-research-blog/accelerating
-ai-innovation-through-measurement-s
cience.
Nguyen, S., Zhou, B., Ding, Y., and Liu, S. Towards sustain-
able large language model serving. ACM SIGENERGY
Energy Informatics Review, 4(5):134–140, 2024.
NIST. Artificial intelligence risk management framework (ai
rmf 1.0). URL: https://nvlpubs. nist. gov/nistpubs/ai/nist.
ai, pp. 100–1, 2023.
NVIDIA. Product carbon footprint summary for nvidia hgx
b200, 2025a. URL https://images.nvidia.co
m/aem-dam/Solutions/documents/HGX-B20
0-PCF-Summary.pdf.
12

Position: Evaluation of ML Resource Utilization Requires Model Life Cycle Assessment
NVIDIA. Product carbon footprint summary for nvidia hgx
h100, 2025b. URL https://images.nvidia.co
m/aem-dam/Solutions/documents/HGX-H10
0-PCF-Summary.pdf.
OpenAI. Working with us caisi and uk aisi to build more
secure ai systems, September 2025a. URL https://
openai.com/index/us-caisi-uk-aisi-a
i-update/.
OpenAI. Announcing the stargate project, 2025b. URL
https://openai.com/index/announcing-t
he-stargate-project/.
Oviedo, F., Kazhamiaka, F., Choukse, E., Kim, A., Luers,
A., Nakagawa, M., Bianchini, R., and Ferres, J. M. L.
Energy use of ai inference: Efficiency pathways and test-
time compute. arXiv preprint arXiv:2509.20241, 2025.
Parashar, M., DeBlanc-Knowles, T., Gianchandani, E., and
Parker, L. E. Strengthening and democratizing artificial
intelligence research and development. Computer, 56
(11):85–90, 2023.
Patel, P., Choukse, E., Zhang, C., Goiri, ´I., Warrier, B., Ma-
halingam, N., and Bianchini, R. Characterizing power
management opportunities for llms in the cloud. In Pro-
ceedings of the 29th ACM International Conference on
Architectural Support for Programming Languages and
Operating Systems, Volume 3, pp. 207–222, 2024.
Patterson, D., Gonzalez, J., Le, Q., Liang, C., Munguia, L.-
M., Rothchild, D., So, D., Texier, M., and Dean, J. Car-
bon emissions and large neural network training. arXiv
preprint arXiv:2104.10350, 2021.
Patterson, D., Gonzalez, J., H¨olzle, U., Le, Q., Liang, C.,
Munguia, L.-M., Rothchild, D., So, D. R., Texier, M.,
and Dean, J. The carbon footprint of machine learning
training will plateau, then shrink. Computer, 55(7):18–28,
2022. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2204.0
5149.
Patterson, D., Gilbert, J. M., Gruteser, M., Robles, E., Sekar,
K., Wei, Y., and Zhu, T. Energy and emissions of machine
learning on smartphones vs. the cloud. Communications
of the ACM, 67(2):86–97, 2024.
Rae, J. W., Borgeaud, S., Cai, T., Millican, K., Hoffmann,
J., Song, F., Aslanides, J., Henderson, S., Ring, R.,
Young, S., et al. Scaling language models: Methods,
analysis & insights from training gopher. arXiv preprint
arXiv:2112.11446, 2021.
Reddi, V. J., Cheng, C., Kanter, D., Mattson, P.,
Schmuelling, G., Wu, C.-J., Anderson, B., Breughe, M.,
Charlebois, M., Chou, W., et al. Mlperf inference bench-
mark. In 2020 ACM/IEEE 47th Annual International
Symposium on Computer Architecture (ISCA), pp. 446–
459. IEEE, 2020.
Rezagholizadeh, M., Passban, P., Cheng, Y., Samiee, S.,
Dong, Y., Partovi Nia, V., Liu, Q., and Chen, B. (eds.).
Fourth Workshop on Efficient Natural Language and
Speech Processing, Vancouver, Canada, 2024.
Sadat Moosavi, N., Gurevych, I., Hou, Y., Kim, G., Kim,
Y. J., Schuster, T., and Agrawal, A. (eds.). Proceedings
of the Fourth Workshop on Simple and Efficient Natu-
ral Language Processing (SustaiNLP), Toronto, Canada
(Hybrid), July 2023. Association for Computational Lin-
guistics. URL https://aclanthology.org/2
023.sustainlp-1.0/.
Sangarya, V., Bradford, R., and Kim, J.-E. Estimating envi-
ronmental cost throughout model’s adaptive life cycle. In
Proceedings of the AAAI/ACM Conference on AI, Ethics,
and Society, volume 7, pp. 1281–1291, 2024.
Schneider, I., Xu, H., Benecke, S., Patterson, D., Huang, K.,
Ranganathan, P., and Elsworth, C. Life-cycle emissions of
ai hardware: A cradle-to-grave approach and generational
trends. arXiv preprint arXiv:2502.01671, 2025.
Shehabi, A., Hubbard, A., Newkirk, A., Lei, N., Siddik, M.
A. B., Holecek, B., Koomey, J., Masanet, E., Sartor, D.,
et al. 2024 united states data center energy usage report,
2024.
Shi, T., Wu, Y., Liu, S., and Ding, Y.
Greenllm: Dis-
aggregating large language model serving on heteroge-
neous gpus for lower carbon emissions. arXiv preprint
arXiv:2412.20322, 2024.
Smith, B. The golden opportunity for american ai, 2025.
URL https://blogs.microsoft.com/on-t
he-issues/2025/01/03/the-golden-oppor
tunity-for-american-ai/.
Stojkovic, J., Choukse, E., Zhang, C., Goiri, I., and
Torrellas, J. Towards greener llms: Bringing energy-
efficiency to the forefront of llm inference. arXiv preprint
arXiv:2403.20306, 2024.
Stojkovic, J., Zhang, C., Goiri, ´I., Torrellas, J., and Choukse,
E. Dynamollm: Designing llm inference clusters for
performance and energy efficiency. In 2025 IEEE In-
ternational Symposium on High Performance Computer
Architecture (HPCA), pp. 1348–1362. IEEE, 2025.
Strubell, E., Ganesh, A., and McCallum, A. Energy and
policy considerations for deep learning in NLP. In Ko-
rhonen, A., Traum, D., and M`arquez, L. (eds.), Pro-
ceedings of the 57th Annual Meeting of the Associa-
tion for Computational Linguistics, pp. 3645–3650, Flo-
rence, Italy, July 2019. Association for Computational
13

Position: Evaluation of ML Resource Utilization Requires Model Life Cycle Assessment
Linguistics.
doi: 10.18653/v1/P19-1355.
URL
https://aclanthology.org/P19-1355/.
Strubell, E., Ganesh, A., and McCallum, A. Energy and
policy considerations for modern deep learning research.
In Proceedings of the AAAI conference on artificial intel-
ligence, volume 34, pp. 13693–13696, 2020.
Sui, Y., Chuang, Y.-N., Wang, G., Zhang, J., Zhang, T.,
Yuan, J., Liu, H., Wen, A., Zhong, S., Chen, H., and Hu,
X. Stop overthinking: A survey on efficient reasoning for
large language models, 2025. URL https://arxiv.
org/abs/2503.16419.
Tay, Y., Dehghani, M., Bahri, D., and Metzler, D. Efficient
transformers: A survey. ACM Comput. Surv., 55(6), De-
cember 2022. ISSN 0360-0300. doi: 10.1145/3530811.
URL https://doi.org/10.1145/3530811.
The White House. Winning the race: America’s ai action
plan. Technical report, Executive Office of the President,
July 2025. URL https://www.whitehouse.g
ov/wp-content/uploads/2025/07/America
s-AI-Action-Plan.pdf.
Tornede, T., Tornede, A., Hanselle, J., Mohr, F., Wever, M.,
and H¨ullermeier, E. Towards green automated machine
learning: Status quo and future directions. Journal of
Artificial Intelligence Research, 77:427–457, 2023.
Treviso, M., Lee, J.-U., Ji, T., van Aken, B., Cao, Q.,
Ciosici, M. R., Hassid, M., Heafield, K., Hooker, S.,
Raffel, C., Martins, P. H., Martins, A. F. T., Forde, J. Z.,
Milder, P., Simpson, E., Slonim, N., Dodge, J., Strubell,
E., Balasubramanian, N., Derczynski, L., Gurevych, I.,
and Schwartz, R.
Efficient methods for natural lan-
guage processing: A survey. Transactions of the As-
sociation for Computational Linguistics, 11:826–860,
2023.
doi: 10.1162/tacl a 00577.
URL https:
//aclanthology.org/2023.tacl-1.48/.
Tschand, A., Rajan, A. T. R., Idgunji, S., Ghosh, A., Holle-
man, J., Kiraly, C., Ambalkar, P., Borkar, R., Chukka, R.,
Cockrell, T., et al. Mlperf power: Benchmarking the en-
ergy efficiency of machine learning systems from µwatts
to mwatts for sustainable ai. In 2025 IEEE International
Symposium on High Performance Computer Architecture
(HPCA), pp. 1201–1216. IEEE, 2025.
U.S. Environmental Protection Agency. About ENERGY
STAR. https://www.energystar.gov/about,
2026. Accessed: 2026-05-29.
Verdecchia, R., Sallou, J., and Cruz, L. A systematic review
of green ai. WIREs Data Mining and Knowledge Discov-
ery, 13(4):e1507, 2023. doi: https://doi.org/10.1002/wi
dm.1507. URL https://wires.onlinelibrar
y.wiley.com/doi/abs/10.1002/widm.1507.
Walsh, E. P., Soldaini, L., Groeneveld, D., Lo, K., Arora,
S., Bhagia, A., Gu, Y., Huang, S., Jordan, M., Lambert,
N., et al. 2 olmo 2 furious (colm’s version). In Second
Conference on Language Modeling, 2025.
Wan, Z., Wang, X., Liu, C., Alam, S., Zheng, Y., et al.
Efficient large language models: A survey. arXiv preprint
arXiv:2312.03863, 1, 2023.
Wang, I., Elhoushi, M., Sumbul, H. E., Hsia, S., Jiang,
D., Ardalani, N., Mahajan, D., Wu, C.-J., and Acun, B.
CATransformers: Carbon aware transformers through
joint model-hardware optimization. In The Thirty-ninth
Annual Conference on Neural Information Processing
Systems, 2025. URL https://openreview.net
/forum?id=IjMZfMVyLF.
Wang, Y., Ma, X., Zhang, G., Ni, Y., Chandra, A., Guo, S.,
Ren, W., Arulraj, A., He, X., Jiang, Z., et al. Mmlu-pro:
A more robust and challenging multi-task language un-
derstanding benchmark. In The Thirty-eight Conference
on Neural Information Processing Systems Datasets and
Benchmarks Track, 2024a.
Wang, Y., Roy, S., Mancini, M., Zhou, K., Tartaglione, E.,
Agrawal, A., Tadesse, G. A., Cristani, M., and Akata,
Z. (eds.). First Workshop on Green Foundation Models,
Milan, Italy, 2024b.
Welleck, S., Bertsch, A., Finlayson, M., Schoelkopf, H.,
Xie, A., Neubig, G., Kulikov, I., and Harchaoui, Z. From
decoding to meta-generation: Inference-time algorithms
for large language models. Transactions on Machine
Learning Research, 2024. ISSN 2835-8856. URL http
s://openreview.net/forum?id=eskQMcIb
MS. Survey Certification.
Wernet, G., Bauer, C., Steubing, B., Reinhard, J., Moreno-
Ruiz, E., and Weidema, B. The ecoinvent database ver-
sion 3 (part i): overview and methodology. The Inter-
national Journal of Life Cycle Assessment, 21(9):1218–
1230, 2016. doi: 10.1007/s11367-016-1087-8. URL
http://link.springer.com/10.1007/s113
67-016-1087-8.
Wu, C.-J., Raghavendra, R., Gupta, U., Acun, B., Ardalani,
N., Maeng, K., Chang, G., Aga, F., Huang, J., Bai, C.,
et al. Sustainable ai: Environmental implications, chal-
lenges and opportunities. Proceedings of Machine Learn-
ing and Systems, 4:795–813, 2022.
Wu, Y., Hua, I., and Ding, Y. Unveiling environmental im-
pacts of large language model serving: A functional unit
view. In Che, W., Nabende, J., Shutova, E., and Pilehvar,
M. T. (eds.), Proceedings of the 63rd Annual Meeting of
the Association for Computational Linguistics (Volume
1: Long Papers), pp. 10560–10576, Vienna, Austria, July
14

Position: Evaluation of ML Resource Utilization Requires Model Life Cycle Assessment
2025. Association for Computational Linguistics. ISBN
979-8-89176-251-0. doi: 10.18653/v1/2025.acl-long.519.
URL https://aclanthology.org/2025.ac
l-long.519/.
Xing, J., Acun, B., Sundarrajan, A., Brooks, D., Chakkar-
avarthy, M., Avila, N., Wu, C.-J., and Lee, B. C. Carbon
responder: Coordinating demand response for the data-
center fleet. arXiv preprint arXiv:2311.08589, 2023.
Yang, Z., Adamek, K., and Armour, W. Part-time power
measurements: nvidia-smi’s lack of attention.
arXiv
preprint arXiv:2312.02741, 2023.
Yao, S., Shinn, N., Razavi, P., and Narasimhan, K. R. Tau-
bench: A benchmark for tool-agent-user interaction in
real-world domains. In The Thirteenth International Con-
ference on Learning Representations, 2025.
You, J., Chung, J.-W., and Chowdhury, M. Zeus: Under-
standing and optimizing {GPU} energy consumption of
{DNN} training. In 20th USENIX Symposium on Net-
worked Systems Design and Implementation (NSDI 23),
pp. 119–139, 2023.
15
