Machine Learning Force Fields
Oliver T. Unke1,†,‡ Stefan Chmiela1,† Huziel E. Sauceda,†,¶ Michael Gastegger,†,‡
Igor Poltavsky,§ Kristof T. Sch¨utt,† Alexandre Tkatchenko,∗,§ and Klaus-Robert
M¨uller∗,†,∥,⊥,#,@
†Machine Learning Group, Technische Universit¨at Berlin, 10587 Berlin, Germany
‡DFG Cluster of Excellence “Unifying Systems in Catalysis” (UniSysCat), Technische
Universit¨at Berlin, 10623 Berlin, Germany
¶ BASLEARN, BASF-TU joint Lab, Technische Universit¨at Berlin, 10587 Berlin, Germany
§Department of Physics and Materials Science, University of Luxembourg, L-1511
Luxembourg City, Luxembourg.
∥BIFOLD–Berlin Institute for the Foundations of Learning and Data, Berlin, Germany
⊥Department of Artiﬁcial Intelligence, Korea University, Anam-dong, Seongbuk-gu, Seoul
02841, Korea
#Max Planck Institute for Informatics, Stuhlsatzenhausweg, 66123 Saarbr¨ucken, Germany
@Google Research, Brain team, Berlin, Germany
E-mail: alexandre.tkatchenko@uni.lu; klaus-robert.mueller@tu-berlin.de
1these authors contributed equally.
Abstract
In recent years, the use of Machine Learning
(ML) in computational chemistry has enabled
numerous advances previously out of reach due
to the computational complexity of traditional
electronic-structure methods. One of the most
promising applications is the construction of
ML-based force ﬁelds (FFs), with the aim to
narrow the gap between the accuracy of ab ini-
tio methods and the eﬃciency of classical FFs.
The key idea is to learn the statistical relation
between chemical structure and potential energy
without relying on a preconceived notion of ﬁxed
chemical bonds or knowledge about the relevant
interactions. Such universal ML approximations
are in principle only limited by the quality and
quantity of the reference data used to train them.
This review gives an overview of applications
of ML-FFs and the chemical insights that can
be obtained from them. The core concepts un-
derlying ML-FFs are described in detail and a
step-by-step guide for constructing and testing
them from scratch is given. The text concludes
with a discussion of the challenges that remain
to be overcome by the next generation of ML-
FFs.
Contents
Abstract
1
1
Introduction
2
2
Mathematical
and
conceptual
framework
6
2.1
Chemistry foundations . . . . . .
6
2.2
Machine learning foundations
. .
8
2.3
Combining machine learning and
chemistry
. . . . . . . . . . . . .
16
3
Best practices and Pitfalls
25
3.1
Preliminary considerations . . . .
25
3.2
Choosing an appropriate ML
method
. . . . . . . . . . . . . .
26
1
arXiv:2010.07067v2  [physics.chem-ph]  12 Jan 2021

3.3
Data collection
. . . . . . . . . .
29
3.4
Data preparation . . . . . . . . .
33
3.5
Training the model . . . . . . . .
35
3.6
Using ML-FFs in production . . .
37
3.7
Example code and software pack-
ages
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
38
4
Physical
and
Chemical
Insights
from
Machine
Learned
Force
Fields
42
4.1
Electronic Eﬀects . . . . . . . . .
43
4.2
Thermodynamics . . . . . . . . .
45
4.3
Reactions
. . . . . . . . . . . . .
46
4.4
Nuclear Quantum Eﬀects . . . . .
47
4.5
Excited States . . . . . . . . . . .
49
4.6
Spectroscopy
. . . . . . . . . . .
50
5
Challenges
51
5.1
Locality and smoothness assump-
tions . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
51
5.2
Transferability, scalability and
long-range interactions . . . . . .
53
6
Concluding remarks
57
Biographies
58
References
60
1
Introduction
In 1964, physicist Richard Feynman famously
remarked “that all things are made of atoms and
that everything that living things do can be un-
derstood in terms of the jigglings and wigglings
of atoms”.1 As such, an atomically resolved pic-
ture can provide invaluable insights on biologi-
cal (and other) processes. The ﬁrst molecular
dynamics (MD) study of a protein in 1977 by
McCammon et al. 2 did not consider explicit sol-
vent molecules and was limited to less than 10 ps
of simulation. Still, it challenged the (at that
time) common belief that proteins are essentially
rigid structures3 and, instead, suggested that
the interior of proteins behaves more ﬂuid-like.
Since then, systems consisting of more than a
million atoms have been studied,4 simulation
times extended to the millisecond regime,5 and
the study of entire viruses in atomic detail made
possible.6,7 Recently, a distributed computing
eﬀort even allowed to study the viral proteome
of SARS-CoV-2 for a total of 0.1 seconds of
simulation time.8
To perform MD simulations, typically, the
Newtonian equations of motion are integrated
numerically, which requires knowledge of the
forces acting on individual atoms at each time
step of the simulation.9 In principle, the most
accurate way to obtain these forces is by solv-
ing the Schr¨odinger equation (SE), which de-
scribes the physical laws underlying most chem-
ical phenomena and processes.10 Unfortunately,
an analytic solution is only possible for two-
body systems such as the hydrogen atom. For
larger chemical structures, the SE can only be
solved approximately. However, even with ap-
proximations, an accurate numerical solution
is a computationally demanding task. For ex-
ample, the CCSD(T) method (coupled cluster
with singles, doubles and perturbative triples),
which is widely regarded as the “gold standard”
of chemistry (as its predictions compare well
with experimental results),11 scales ∝N 7 with
the number of atoms N. 1 Because of this, it is
unfeasible to calculate the forces for many dif-
ferent conﬁgurations of large chemical systems,
which is required for running MD simulations,
with accurate methods. Instead, simple empiri-
cal functions are commonly used to model the
relevant interactions. From these so-called force
ﬁelds (FFs), atomic forces can be readily derived
analytically.
Most conventional FFs model chemical inter-
actions as a sum over bonded and non-bonded
terms.12,13 The former can be described with
simple functions of the distances between di-
rectly bonded atoms, or angles and dihedrals
between atoms sharing some of their bonding
partners. The non-bonded terms consider pair-
wise combinations of atoms, typically by model-
ing electrostatics with Coulomb’s law (assuming
1Strictly speaking, the true scaling of the CCSD(T)
method is O(n7), where n is the number of basis func-
tions used for the wave function ansatz. Depending on
the desired accuracy and which atoms are present (more
precisely, how many electrons are in their shells), n can
vary greatly. However, the number of atoms is usually a
good proxy.
2

Figure 1: Accurate ab initio methods are computationally demanding and can only be used to
study small systems in gas phase or regular periodic materials. Larger molecules in solution,
such as proteins, are typically modeled by force ﬁelds, empirical functions which trade accuracy
for computational eﬃciency. Machine learning methods are closing this gap and allow to study
increasingly large chemical systems at ab initio accuracy with force ﬁeld eﬃciency.
a point charge at each atom’s position) and
dispersion with a Lennard-Jones potential.14
Due to the computational eﬃciency of these
terms, such classical FFs allow to study sys-
tems consisting of many thousands of atoms.
However, while oﬀering a qualitatively reason-
able description of chemical interactions, the
quality of MD simulations, and hence the in-
sights that can be obtained from them, are
ultimately limited by the accuracy of the un-
derlying FF.15 This is particularly problematic
when polarization, or many-body interactions in
general, are of signiﬁcant importance, as these
eﬀects are not adequately modeled by the terms
described above. While it is possible to con-
struct polarizable FFs16–19 or account for other
important eﬀects, e.g. anisotropic charge distri-
butions,20,21 to improve accuracy (in exchange
for computational eﬃciency), it is not always
clear a priori when such modiﬁcations are nec-
essary. Beyond that, conventional FFs require
a preconceived notion of bonding patterns and
thus cannot describe bond breaking or bond for-
mation. While there exist reactive FFs oﬀering
an approximated description of reactions,22–24
they are often not suﬃciently accurate for quan-
titative studies or restricted to speciﬁc types of
reactions. Mixed quantum mechanics/molecular
mechanics (QM/MM) treatments25 pose an al-
ternative solution: Here, the SE is only solved
for a small part of the system where high ac-
curacy is required or reactions may take place,
e.g. the active site of an enzyme. Meanwhile, all
remaining atoms are treated at the FF level of
accuracy. Although this is more eﬃcient than a
pure quantum-mechanical approach, it is often
3

necessary to model a large number of atoms at
the QM level for converged results,26 which is
still highly computationally demanding.
In a “dream scenario” for computational
chemists and biologists, it would be possible
to treat even large systems at the highest lev-
els of theory, which would require prohibitively
large computational resources in the real world.
Machine learning (ML) methods could help to
achieve this dream in a principled manner, thus
closing the gap between the accuracy of ab ini-
tio methods and the eﬃciency of classical FFs
(Fig. 1). ML methods aim to learn the func-
tional relationship between inputs (chemical de-
scriptors) and outputs (properties) from pat-
terns or structure in the data. Ideally, a trained
learning machine would then reﬂect the under-
lying eﬀective “rules” of quantum mechanics.27
Practically, ML models can take a shortcut by
not having to solve any equations that follow
from the physical laws governing the structure-
property relation. Because of this unique ability,
ML methods have been enjoying growing pop-
ularity in the chemical sciences in recent years.
They allow to explore chemical space and predict
the properties of compounds with both unprece-
dented eﬃciency and high accuracy.27–32 ML
has also been used to augment and accelerate
traditional methods used in molecular simula-
tions, e.g. for sampling equilibrium states33,34
and rare events,35 computing reaction rates,36
exploring protein folding dynamics37 and other
biophysical processes,38–42 Markov state model-
ing,43–49 and coarse-graining50–53 (for a recent
review on applications of ML in molecular sim-
ulatons, see Ref. 54). Recent advances made it
even possible to predict molecular wave func-
tions, which can act as an interface between
ML and quantum chemistry,55,56 as knowledge
of the wave function allows to deduce many dif-
ferent quantum mechanical observables at once.
ML can also be combined with more traditional
semi-empirical methods, for example by pre-
dicting accurate repulsive potentials for density
functional tight-binding approaches.57 Instead
of circumventing equations, ML methods can
also help when solving them: They have been
used to ﬁnd novel density functionals58–60 and
solutions of the Schr¨odinger equation.61,62 Other
promising applications include the generation
of molecular structures to tackle inverse design
problems,63–67 or planning chemical syntheses.68
For constructing ML-FFs, suitable reference
data to learn the relevant structure-property re-
lation include energy, forces, or a combination
of both, obtained from ab initio calculations.
Contrary to conventional FFs, no preconceived
notion of bonding patterns needs to be assumed.
Instead, all chemical behavior is learned from the
reference data. This allows to reconstruct the
important interactions purely from atomic po-
sitions without imposing a restricted analytical
form on the interatomic potential and enables
a natural description of chemical reactions. For
example, it is now possible to construct ML-FFs
for small molecules from CCSD(T) reference
data close to spectroscopic accuracy and with
computational eﬃciency similar to conventional
FFs.69,70 This has enabled studies that would be
prohibitively expensive with conventional meth-
ods of computational chemistry and allowed to
obtain novel chemical insights (see Fig. 2).
Other properties than energies and forces
can be predicted as well: For example, dipole
moments, which are a measure for how polar
molecules are, can be used to calculate infrared
spectra from MD simulations71–73 and allow
a comparison to experimental measurements.
Other prediction targets could be used to screen
large compound databases for molecules with
desirable properties several orders of magni-
tude faster than with ab initio methods. The
HOMO/LUMO gap, which is important for ma-
terials used in electronic devices such as solar
cells,74 is only one prominent example of many
potentially interesting prediction targets.
This review will focus on the construction of
ML-FFs for the usage in MD simulations and
other applications (for details on how to set up
such simulations or how to extract physical in-
sights from them, refer to Refs. 75–77). The
text is structured as follows: Section 2 reviews
fundamental concepts of chemistry (2.1) and ma-
chine learning (2.2) relevant to the construction
of ML-FFs and discusses special considerations
when the two are combined (2.3). As this arti-
cle is intended for both chemists and machine
learning practitioners, these sections provide all
4

Figure 2: ML-FFs combine the accuracy of ab initio methods and the eﬃciency of classical FFs.
They provide easy access to a system’s potential energy surface (PES), which can in turn be used
to derive a plethora of other quantities. By using them to run MD simulations on a single PES,
ML-FFs allow chemical insights inaccessible to other methods (see gray box). For example, they
accurately model electronic eﬀects and their inﬂuence on thermodynamic observables and allow a
natural description of chemical reactions, which is diﬃcult or even impossible with conventional
FFs. Their eﬃciency also allows them to be applied in situations where the Born–Oppenheimer
approximation begins to break down and a single PES no longer provides an adequate description.
An example is the study of nuclear quantum eﬀects and electronically excited states (upper right).
Finally, ML-FFs can be further enhanced by modeling additional properties. This provides direct
access to a wide range of molecular spectra, building a bridge between theory and experiment (lower
right). In general, such studies would be prohibitively expensive with ab initio methods.
5

readers with the necessary background to un-
derstand the remainder of the review. Experts
in either ﬁeld may want to skip over the re-
spective sections, as they discuss fundamentals.
The next part (Section 3) serves as a step-by-
step guide and reference for readers that want
to apply ML-FFs in their own research. Here,
the best practices for constructing ML-FFs are
outlined, possible problems that may be encoun-
tered along the way (and how to avoid them) are
discussed and an overview of several software
packages, which may be used to accelerate the
construction of ML-FFs, is provided. Section 4
lists several applications of ML-FFs described in
the literature and highlights physical and chem-
ical insights made possible through the use of
ML. The review is concluded in Section 5 by
a discussion of obstacles that still need to be
overcome to extend the applicability of ML-FFs
to an even broader context.
2
Mathematical
and
con-
ceptual framework
Section 2.1 reviews important chemical concepts
such as the potential energy surface and invari-
ance properties of physical systems, which are
essential for constructing physically meaningful
models. It is meant as a short summary of the
most important physical principles and funda-
mental chemical knowledge for readers with a
primarily ML-focused background who are in-
terested in constructing ML-FFs. On the other
hand, to oﬀer readers with a chemical back-
ground a ﬁrst orientation, an overview of two
important methodologies in Machine Learning,
namely kernel-based learning approaches and
artiﬁcial neural networks, is given in Section 2.2.
Finally, Section 2.3 lists constraints related to
the physical invariances mentioned earlier and
gives examples of models for constructing ML-
FFs and how they implement these constraints
in practice.
2.1
Chemistry foundations
The Schr¨odinger equation (SE),78 which de-
scribes the interaction of atomic nuclei and elec-
trons, is suﬃcient for understanding most chem-
ical phenomena and processes.10 Unfortunately,
it can only be solved analytically for very sim-
ple systems, such as the hydrogen atom. For
more complex systems like molecules, exact nu-
merical solutions are often impractical due to a
steep increase of computational costs as a func-
tion of system size. For this reason, numerous
approximation schemes have been devised to
enable insights into more complicated chemical
systems.
Virtually all of these are based on
the Born-Oppenheimer (BO) approximation,79
which decouples electronic and nuclear motion
so that the latter can be neglected. It is as-
sumed that electrons adjust instantaneously to
changes in the nuclear positions, which is moti-
vated by the observation that atomic nuclei are
heavier than electrons by several orders of magni-
tude, thus moving on a vastly diﬀerent timescale.
Hence, the nuclear positions appear almost sta-
tionary to the electrons and therefore enter the
resulting “electronic SE” only parametrically:
The energy of the electrons depends on the ex-
ternal potential caused by the nuclei, which in
turn is fully determined by their positions and
nuclear charges. By summing electronic energy
and Coulomb repulsion between nuclei, the to-
tal potential energy of the system is obtained,
which is one of the most important properties
of molecules. Alongside entropic contributions,
it determines the relative stability of diﬀerent
compounds, whether reactions are exothermic
or endothermic, and can even serve as proxy
for more complex properties. For example, the
potency of some drugs can be estimated from
their binding energy to biomolecules.80
2.1.1
The potential energy surface
By introducing a parametric dependency be-
tween energy and nuclei, the BO approximation
implies the existence of a functional relation
f : {Zi, ri}N
i=1 7→E, which maps the nuclear
charges Zi and positions ri of N atoms directly
to their potential energy E. This function, called
the potential energy surface (PES), governs the
dynamics of a chemical system, similar to a ball
rolling on a hilly landscape. Minima (“valleys”)
on the PES correspond to stable molecules and
6

signiﬁcant structural changes (or even chemical
reactions) occur when a system crosses over a
transition state (“ridge”) from one minimum
into another (Fig. 3).
Figure 3: Top: Two-dimensional projections
of the PESs of diﬀerent molecules, highlighting
rich topological diﬀerences and various possi-
ble shapes. Bottom: Cut through the PES of
keto-malondialdehyde for rotations of the two
aldehyde groups. Note that the shape repeats
periodically for full rotations. Regions with low
potential energy are drawn in blue and high en-
ergy regions in yellow. Structure (a) leads to a
steep increase in energy due to the proximity of
the two oxygen atoms carrying negative partial
charges. Local minima of the PES are shown
in (b) and (c), whereas (d) displays structural
ﬂuctuations around the global minimum. By
running molecular dynamics simulations, the
most common transition paths (F1, F2, and F3)
between the diﬀerent minima could be revealed.
Knowledge of the PES therefore also allows
to predict how a system evolves over time. For
example, by studying a thermal ensemble of
molecules starting from the same minimum on
the PES, it is possible to determine which frac-
tion of them will reach diﬀerent minima and in
what time frame, allowing to assess their reac-
tivity and which products are formed. It is also
possible to deduce the macroscopic thermody-
namic properties of a system by studying how it
behaves at an atomic level. In such molecular dy-
namics (MD) simulations, a classical treatment
of nuclear dynamics is sometimes suﬃciently
accurate. In case of signiﬁcant nuclear delocal-
ization, which may occur in systems with light
atoms, strong bonds, or for shallow potential
energy landscapes,81 nuclear quantum eﬀects
(NQEs) must be included as well. Even then,
methods like path-integral MD establish a one-
to-one correspondence between the properties
of a quantum object and a classical system with
an extended phase space, eliminating the need
to solve the nuclear SE.82–84
At each time step of a dynamics simulation,
the forces Fi acting on each atom i must be
known so that the equations of motion can be
integrated numerically (e.g. using the Verlet al-
gorithm85). They can be derived from the PES
by using the relation Fi = −∇riE, i.e. the forces
are the negative gradient of the potential energy
E with respect to the atomic positions ri (see
also Section 2.1.2). Forces can also be used to
perform geometry optimizations, e.g. to ﬁnd spe-
cial conﬁgurations of atoms which correspond
to critical points on the PES. For example, the
height of a reaction barrier can be computed
from the energy diﬀerence between the saddle
point (transition state) and either of the two
minima (equilibrium structures) which are con-
nected by it.
Although the BO approximation simpliﬁes the
SE, even approximate solutions can be compu-
tationally demanding, in particular for large
systems containing many degrees of freedom.
Thus, it is often unfeasible to derive ab initio
energies and forces for each time step of an MD
simulation. For this reason, analytical functions,
i.e. force ﬁelds (FFs), are typically used to rep-
resent the PES, circumventing the problem of
solving an equation altogether. The diﬃculty
is then shifted to ﬁnding an appropriate func-
tional form and parametrization of the FF. ML
methods automate this demanding and time-
consuming process by learning an appropriate
function from reference data.
7

2.1.2
Invariances of physical systems
Closed physical systems are governed by various
conservation laws that describe invariant proper-
ties. They are fundamental principles of nature
that characterize symmetries that must not be
violated. As such, conservation laws provide
strong constraints that can be used as guiding
principles in search of physically plausible ML
models. The basic invariances of molecular sys-
tems are directly derived from Noether’s theo-
rem,86 which states that each conserved quantity
is associated with a diﬀerentiable symmetry of
the action of a physical system. Typical con-
served quantities include the total energy (fol-
lowing from temporal invariance), as well as an-
gular and linear momentum (roto-translational
invariance). Energy conservation imposes a par-
ticular structure on vector ﬁelds in order for
them to be valid force ﬁelds with corresponding
potentials. Namely, forces must be the negative
gradient of the potential energy with respect
to atomic positions. This relation ensures that
when atoms move, they always acquire the same
amount of kinetic energy as they lose in poten-
tial energy (and vice versa), i.e. the total energy
is constant (the work done along closed paths
is zero). The conservation of linear and angular
momentum implies that the potential energy of
a molecule only depends on the relative posi-
tion of its atoms to each other, i.e. it does not
change with rigid rotations and/or translations.
Another invariance (not derived from Noether’s
theorem) follows from the fact that, from the per-
spective of the electrons, atoms with the same
nuclear charge appear identical to each other.
They can thus be exchanged without aﬀecting
the energy and forces, which makes the PES sym-
metric with respect to permutations of some of
its arguments. To ensure physically meaningful
predictions, ML-FFs must be made invariant
under the same transformations as the true PES
by introducing appropriate constraints.
2.2
Machine
learning
founda-
tions
A question that frequently arises for researchers
new to the ﬁeld of ML concerns the diﬀerence of
ML modeling to plain interpolation in the noise
free regression case.
After all, the Shannon
sampling theorem gives bounds for the number
of “training samples” needed to reconstruct a
band-limited signal exactly.87 Since the regres-
sion tasks considered in this review use ab initio
data as reference, they can be considered practi-
cally noise-free. Furthermore, PESs are usually
smooth, i.e. there is a well-deﬁned frequency
cutoﬀin the spectrum of this “signal”. Thus,
both requirements for Shannon interpolation are
satisﬁed and it should in principle be possible
to reconstruct FFs via interpolation of the train-
ing samples without error, provided there are
enough of them.
This is where ML diverges from signal inter-
polation theory. In practice, there is often not
enough data available to fully capture all the nec-
essary information for a perfect reconstruction.
In that case, the goal of ML methods is not to
recover the training data, but rather to estimate
the true process with its underlying regularities
that also describes all new and unseen data –
this is often denoted as generalization. The key
to generalization is selecting a model based on
the well known principle of Occam’s razor, i.e.
the notion that simpler hypotheses are more
likely to be correct.88 The capacity of the model
can be controlled using the bias–variance trade-
oﬀ89 (a compromise between expressiveness and
complexity) and is practically done by exercising
model selection techniques (see Section 2.2.3)
such as cross-validation that leave out part of
the data from the ML training process and use
it later to obtain a valid estimate of the general-
ization error.30,90 The reason why regularization
is often needed is that ML algorithms are uni-
versal approximators, i.e. they can approximate
any continuous function on a closed interval
arbitrarily close. Since for a ﬁnite amount of
reference data inﬁnitely many such functions are
thinkable, a regularization mechanism is often
needed to select a preferably simple function
from the vast space of possibilities.
ML methods typically rely on the fact that
nonlinear problems, such as predicting en-
ergy from nuclear positions, can be “linearized”
by mapping the input to a (often higher-
dimensional) “feature space” (see Fig. 4).90–93
8

x1
x2
x1
x2
0.5
x1
x2
x3
0.5
x1
x2
x3
0.5
x1
x2
x3
A
B
Figure 4: A: The blue and red points with
coordinates (x1, x2) are linearly inseparable. B:
By deﬁning a suitable mapping from the input
space (x1, x2) to a higher-dimensional feature
space (x1, x2, x3), blue and red points become
linearly separable (gray plane at x3 = 0.5).
Note that such feature spaces are explicitly con-
structed for kernel-based learning methods (see
Section 2.2.1) or learned respectively for deep
learning models94 (see Section 2.2.2). Kernel-
based methods achieve this by taking advantage
of the so-called kernel trick 92,95–98 which allows
implicitly operating in a high-dimensional fea-
ture space without explicitly performing any
computation there. In contrast, artiﬁcial neural
networks (NNs) decompose a complex non-linear
function into a composition of linear transfor-
mations with learnable parameters connected
by nonlinear activation functions. With increas-
ingly many of such nonlinear transformations
organized in “layers” (deep NNs), it is possi-
ble to eﬃciently learn highly complex feature
spaces.
While NNs tend to require more training data
to reach the same accuracy as kernel methods
(see Fig. 5),99 they typically scale better to
larger data sets. In general, neither method
is strictly superior over the other100 and both
have advantages and disadvantages that must be
weighed against each other for a speciﬁc applica-
tion. Recently, it has even been discovered that
in the limit of inﬁnitely wide layers, deep NNs
are equivalent to kernel methods, which shifts
the main diﬀerentiating factor between both
methodologies to how they are constructed and
trained101,102 and makes deep NNs accessible to
kernel-based analysis methods.103,104
In the following, kernel methods and neural
networks are described in more detail to high-
light the most important properties that diﬀer-
entiate both methodologies.
Figure 5: Mean absolute force prediction er-
rors (MAEs) of diﬀerent ML models trained
on molecules in the MD17 dataset,105 col-
ored by model type. Overall, kernel methods
(GDML,105 sGDML,69 FCHL18/19106,107) are
slightly more data eﬃcient, i.e. they produce
more accurate predictions with smaller train-
ing datasets, but neural network architectures
(PhysNet,108 SchNet,109 DimeNet,110 EANN,111
DeePMD,112 DeepPot-SE,113 ACSF,114 HIP-
NN115) catch up quickly with increasing training
set size and continue to improve when more data
for training is available.
2.2.1
Kernel-based methods
Given a data set {(yi; xi)}M
i=1 of M reference
values yi ∈R for inputs xi ∈RD, kernel regres-
sion aims to estimate y∗for unknown inputs
x∗. For example, for PES construction, y is
the potential energy and x encodes structural
information about the atoms, i.e. their nuclear
charges and relative positions in space. Popu-
lar choices for such “descriptors” are vectors of
internal coordinates, Coulomb matrices,28 rep-
resentations of atomic environments (e.g. sym-
metry functions,116 SOAP117 or FCHL106,107),
or an encoding of crystal structure.118–120
The representer theorem states that the func-
tional relation
y = f(x) + ϵ ,
(1)
where ϵ denotes measurement noise, can be op-
timally approximated as a linear combination
f(x) ≈ˆf(x) =
M
X
i=1
αiK(x, xi) ,
(2)
9

D
r
E(r)
true E(r)
x = r
x = e
r
training data
(x1, y1)
(x2, y2)
(x3, y3)
(x4, y4)
(x5, y5)
A
f(x)
f(x)
training data
C
f(x)
= 0.0, || || = 3.69 1012
= 1.0, || || = 1.81
= 0.1, || || = 5.66
noisy data
1
2
3
4
5
K(x, xi) = e
||x
xi||2
B
1K(x, x1)
2K(x, x2)
3K(x, x3)
4K(x, x4)
5K(x, x5)
f(x) =
N
i = 1
iK(x, xi)
Figure 6: Overview of the mathematical concepts that form the basis of kernel methods. A:
Gaussian process regression of a one-dimensional function f(x) (red line) from M = 5 data samples
(xi, yi). The black line ˆf(x) depicts the mean (Eq. 8) of the conditional probability p(y∗|y) (see
Eq. 7), whereas the gray area depicts two standard deviations from its mean (see Eq. 9). Note
that predictions are most conﬁdent in regions where training data is present. B: The function ˆf(x)
can be expressed as a linear combination of M kernel functions K(x, xi) weighted with regression
coeﬃcients αi (see Eq. 2). In this example, the Gaussian kernel (Eq. 4) is used (the hyperparameter
γ controls its width). C: Inﬂuence of noise on prediction performance. Here, the function f(x) (thick
gray line) is learned from M = 25 samples, however, each data point (xi, yi) contains observational
noise (see Eq. 6). When the coeﬃcients αi are determined without regularization, i.e. no noise is
assumed to be present, the model function reproduces the training samples faithfully, but undulates
wildly between data points (orange line, λ = 0). The regularized solution (blue line, λ = 0.1, see
Eq. 10) is much smoother and stays closer to the true function f(x), but individual data points
are not reproduced exactly. When the regularization is too strong (green line, λ = 1.0), the model
function becomes unable to ﬁt the data. Note how regularization shrinks the magnitude of the
coeﬃcient vectors ∥α∥. D: For constructing force ﬁelds, it is necessary to encode molecular structure
with a representation x. The choice of this structural descriptor may strongly inﬂuence model
performance. Here, the potential energy E of a diatomic molecule (thick gray line) is learned
from M = 5 data points by two kernel machines using diﬀerent structural representations (both
models use a Gaussian kernel). When the interatomic distance r is used as descriptor (orange line,
x = r), the predicted potential energy oscillates between data points, leading to spurious minima
and qualitatively wrong behavior for large r. A model using the descriptor x = e−r (blue line)
predicts a physically meaningful potential energy curve that is qualitatively correct even when the
model extrapolates.
10

Figure 7: Kernel ridge regression can be un-
derstood as a linear integral operator Tk that is
applied to the (only partially known) target func-
tion of interest f(x). Such operators are deﬁned
as convolutions with a continuous kernel func-
tion K, whose response is the regression result.
Because the training data is typically not sam-
pled on a grid, this convolution task transforms
to a linear system that yields the regression coef-
ﬁcients α. Because only Tkf(x) and not the true
f(x) is recovered, the challenge is to ﬁnd a kernel
that deﬁnes an operator that leaves the relevant
parts of its original function invariant. This is
why the Gaussian kernel (Eq. 4) is a popular
choice: Depending on the chosen length scale γ,
it attenuates high frequency components, while
passing through the low frequency components
of the input, therefore making only minimal as-
sumptions about the target function. However,
stronger assumptions (e.g. by combining kernels
with physically-motivated descriptors) increase
the sample eﬃciency of the regressor.
where αi are coeﬃcients and K(x, x′) is a (typ-
ically nonlinear) symmetric and positive semi-
deﬁnite function121–123 that measures the sim-
ilarity of two compound descriptors x and x′
(see Fig. 7).2 Examples for such functions K are
the polynomial kernel
K(x, x′) = (⟨x, x′⟩+ c)d ,
(3)
where hyperparameter d is the degree of the
polynomial and ⟨·, ·⟩is the dot product, or the
Gaussian kernel given by
K(x, x′) = e−γ∥x−x′∥2
(4)
with
hyperparameter
γ
controlling
its
width/scale and ∥·∥denoting the L2-norm
(see Refs. 30,90,97,125 for more examples of
kernel functions).
The structure and number of dimensions of
the associated Hilbert space H depends on the
choice of K(x, x′) and dimension of the inputs
x and x′. As an example, consider the poly-
nomial kernel (Eq. 3) with degree d = 2 and
two-dimensional inputs. The corresponding ho-
mogeneous (c = 0) polynomial mapping is given
by φ : (x1, x2) 7→(x2
1,
√
2x1x2, x2
2), so the associ-
ated H is three-dimensional. While in this case,
it is still possible to compute φ and evaluate the
inner product of two points φ(x) and φ(x′) ex-
plicitly, the advantage of using kernels becomes
apparent when the Gaussian kernel (Eq. 4) is
considered. Rewriting Eq. 4 as
K(x, x′) = e−γ∥x∥2e−γ∥x′∥2e2γ⟨x,x′⟩
(5)
and expanding the third factor in a Taylor se-
ries e2γ⟨x,x′⟩= P∞
d=0
1
d! (2γ⟨x, x′⟩)d reveals that
the Gaussian kernel is equivalent to an inﬁnite
sum over (scaled) polynomial kernels (see Eq. 3)
and the associated H is ∞-dimensional. For-
tunately, by using the kernel function K(x, x′),
it is possible to operate in H implicitly and
evaluate ˆf(x) (Eq. 2) without computing the
mapping φ.
This is often referred to as the
2The function K(x, x′) computes the inner product
of two points φ(x) and φ(x′) in some Hilbert space H
(the feature space) without the need to evaluate (or even
know) the mapping φ : RD 7→H explicitly, i.e. K(x, x′)
is a reproducing kernel of H.90,124
11

kernel trick.90,92,95–97,125
It remains the question how the coeﬃcients αi
in Eq. 2 are determined. One way to do so is by
adopting a Bayesian, or probabilistic, point of
view.126,127 Here, it is assumed that the reference
data {(yi; xi)}M
i=1 are generated by a Gaussian
process (GP), i.e. drawn from a multivariate
Gaussian distribution. For simplicity, it can be
assumed that this distribution has a mean of
zero, as other values can be generated by simply
adding a constant term. Further, the possibility
that the reference data might be contaminated
by noise (for example due to uncertainties in
measuring yi) is accounted for explicitly. Typi-
cally, Gaussian noise is assumed, i.e.
yi = f(xi) + N(0, λ) ,
(6)
where λ is the variance of the normally dis-
tributed noise N. In the GP picture, the choice
of K(x, x′) expresses an assumption about the
underlying function class. For example, choos-
ing the Gaussian kernel implies that f(x) does
not change drastically over a length scale con-
trolled by γ (see Eq. 4). As such, a particular
kernel function K corresponds to an implicit
regularization, i.e. an assumption about the un-
derlying smoothness properties of the function
to be estimated.128 The challenge lies in ﬁnd-
ing a kernel that represents the structure in the
data that is being modeled as good as possi-
ble.103,128 Many kernels are able to approximate
continuous functions on a compact subset ar-
bitrarily well,128,129 but a strong prior has the
advantage of restricting the hypothesis space,
which drastically improves the convergence of
the learning task with respect to the available
training data.130
Under these conditions, it is now possible to
rigorously answer the question “given the data
y = [y1 · · · yM]⊤, how likely is it to observe the
value y∗for input x∗?” As y∗is generated by the
same GP as the reference data, the conditional
probability p(y∗|y) can be expressed as
y
y∗

∼N

0,
K + λIM
K⊤
∗
K∗
K(x∗, x∗)

, (7)
where IM is the identity matrix of size M, K is
the M×M kernel matrix90,131 with entries Kij =
K(xi, xj) and K∗= [K(x∗, x1) · · · K(x∗, xM)].
In other words, Eq. 7 expresses a probability
distribution over possible predictions, where its
mean value
¯y∗= K∗(K + λIM)−1 y
(8)
is the most likely estimate for y∗(given the
reference data) and its variance
var(y∗) = K(x∗, x∗)−K∗(K + λIN)−1 K⊤
∗(9)
provides information about how strongly other
likely predictions vary from the mean. Note
that while Eq. 9 can be used as uncertainty
estimate for a particular prediction, it should
not be confused with error bars. The optimal
coeﬃcients α = [α1 · · · αM]⊤in Eq. 2 are thus
given by
α = (K + λIM)−1 y
(10)
or simply α = K−1y in the noise-free case
(λ = 0). However, even in the absence of noise,
it can be beneﬁcial to choose a non-zero λ to
obtain a regularized solution. The addition of
λ > 0 to the diagonal of K increases numeri-
cal stability and has the eﬀect of damping the
magnitude of the coeﬃcients, thereby increas-
ing the smoothness of ˆf(x). The downside is
that the known reference values yi are only ap-
proximately reproduced. This, however, also
decreases the chance of overﬁtting and can lead
to better generalization, i.e. increased accuracy
when predicting unknown values.
Matrix factorization methods like Cholesky de-
composition132 are typically used to eﬃciently
solve the linear problem in Eq. 10 in closed form.
However, this type of approach scales as O(M 3)
with the number of reference data and may be-
come problematic for extremely large data sets.
Iterative, e.g. gradient-based, solvers can reduce
the complexity to O(M 2).133 Once the coeﬃ-
cients have been determined, the value y∗for an
arbitrary input x∗can be estimated according
to Eq. 2 with O(M) complexity (a sum over all
M reference data points is required).
Alternatively, a variety of approximation tech-
niques exploit that kernel matrices usually have
12

a small numerical rank, i.e. a rapidly decaying
eigenvalue spectrum. This enables approximate
factorizations RRT ≈K, where R is either a
rectangular matrix ∈RM×L with L < M or
sparse. As a result Eq. 10 becomes easier to
solve, albeit the result will not be exact.134–138
A straightforward approach to approximate
a linear system is to pick a representative or
random subset of L points ˜x from the dataset (in
principle, even arbitrary ˜x could be chosen) and
construct a rectangular kernel matrix KLM ∈
RL×M with entries KLM,ij = K(˜xi, xj). Then,
the corresponding coeﬃcients can be obtained
via the Moore-Penrose pseudoinverse139,140
˜α = (1 + λ)−1  KLMK⊤
LM
−1 KLMy .
(11)
Solving Eq. 11 scales as O(ML2) and is much
less computationally demanding than inverting
the original matrix in Eq. 10. Once the L coef-
ﬁcients ˜α are obtained, the model can be eval-
uated with ˆf(x) = P
L ˜αiK(x, ˜xi), i.e. an addi-
tional beneﬁt is that evaluation now scales as
O(L) instead of O(M) (see Eq. 2).
However, the approximation above gives rise
to an over-determined system with fewer param-
eters than training points and therefore reduced
model capacity. Strictly speaking, the involved
matrix does not satisfy the properties of a ker-
nel matrix anymore, as it is neither symmetric
nor positive semi-deﬁnite. To obtain a kernel
matrix that still maintains these properties, the
Nystr¨om134 approximation
K ≈˜K = K⊤
LMK−1
LLKLM
(12)
can be used instead. Here, the sub-matrix KLL
is a true kernel matrix between all inducing
points ˜xi. Using the Woodbury matrix iden-
tity,141 the regularized inverse is given by
( ˜K + λIM)−1 = λ−1[IM −K⊤
LM
 λKLL + KLMK⊤
LM
−1 KLM]
(13)
and ˜α = ( ˜K + λIM)−1y. The computational
complexity of solving the Nystr¨om approxima-
tion is O(L3 + ML2).
It should be mentioned that kernel regression
methods are known under diﬀerent names in
the literature of diﬀerent communities.
Due
to their relation to GPs, some authors prefer
the name Gaussian process regression (GPR).
Others favor the term kernel ridge regression
(KRR), since determining the coeﬃcients with
Eq. 10 corresponds to solving a least-squares
objective with L2-regularization in the kernel
feature space φ and is similar to ordinary ridge
regression.142 Sometimes, the method is also re-
ferred to as reproducing kernel Hilbert space
(RKHS) interpolation, since Eq. 2 “interpolates”
between known reference values (when coeﬃ-
cients are determined with λ = 0, all known
reference values are reproduced exactly). All
these methods are formally equivalent and es-
sentially diﬀer only in the manner the relevant
equations are derived. There are small philo-
sophical diﬀerences, however: For example, in
the KRR and RKHS pictures, λ in Eq. 10 is a
regularization hyperparameter that has to be in-
troduced ad hoc, whereas in the GPR picture, λ
is directly related to the Gaussian noise in Eq. 6.
The expansion coeﬃcients obtained from Eq. 10
can change drastically depending on the choice
of λ, so this is an important detail. Further,
while Eq. 9 can be used to compute uncertainty
estimates for all kernel regression methods, the
GPR picture allows to relate it directly to the
variance of a Gaussian process.
The most important concepts discussed in this
section are summarized visually in Fig 6.
2.2.2
Artiﬁcial neural networks
Originally, artiﬁcial neural networks (NNs) were,
as suggested by their name, intended to model
the intricate networks formed by biological neu-
rons.143 Since then, they have become a stan-
dard ML algorithm94,98,143–149 only remotely re-
lated to their original biological inspiration. In
the simplest case, the fundamental building
blocks of NNs are dense (or “fully-connected”)
layers – linear transformations from input vec-
tors x ∈Rnin to output vectors y ∈Rnout ac-
cording to
y = Wx + b ,
(14)
where both weights W ∈Rnout×nin and biases
b ∈Rnout are parameters, and nin and nout de-
note the number of dimensions of x and y, re-
13

Figure 8: Schematic representation of the mathematical concepts underlying artiﬁcial (feed-forward)
neural networks. A: A single artiﬁcial neuron can have an arbitrary number of inputs and outputs.
Here, a neuron that is connected to two inputs i1 and i2 with “synaptic weights” w1 and w2 is
depicted. The bias term b can be thought of as the weight of an additional input with a value of
1. Artiﬁcial neurons compute the weighted sum of their inputs and pass this value through an
activation function σ to other neurons in the neural network (here, the neuron has three outputs
with connection weights w′
1, w′
2, and w′
3). B: A possible activation function σ(x). The bias term b
eﬀectively shifts the activation function along the x-axis. Many non-linear functions are valid choices,
but the most popular are sigmoid transformations such as tanh(x) or (smooth) ramp functions, e.g.
max(0, x) or ln(1 + ex). C: Artiﬁcial neural network with a single hidden layer of three neurons
(gray) that maps two inputs x1 and x2 (blue) to two outputs y1 and y2 (yellow), see Eq. 15. For
regression tasks, the output neurons typically use no activation function. Computing the weighted
sums for the neurons of each layer can be eﬃciently implemented as a matrix vector product (Eq. 14).
Some entries of the weight matrices (W and W′) and bias vectors (b and b′) are highlighted in color
with the corresponding connection in the diagram. D: Schematic depiction of a deep neural network
with L hidden layers (Eq. 16). Compared to using a single hidden layer with many neurons, it is
usually more parameter-eﬃcient to connect multiple hidden layers with fewer neurons sequentially.
14

spectively. Evidently, a single dense layer can
only express linear functions.
Non-linear re-
lations between inputs and outputs can only
be modeled when at least two dense layers are
stacked and combined with a non-linear activa-
tion function σ:
h = σ (Wx + b) ,
y = W′h + b′ .
(15)
Provided that the number of dimensions of the
“hidden layer” h is large enough, this arrange-
ment can approximate any mapping between
inputs x and outputs y to arbitrary precision,
i.e. it is a general function approximator.150,151
In theory, shallow NNs as shown above are
suﬃcient to approximate any functional rela-
tionship.151 However, deep NNs with multiple
hidden layers are often superior and were shown
to be more parameter-eﬃcient.152–155 To con-
struct a deep NN, L hidden layers are combined
sequentially
h1 = σ (W1x + b1) ,
h2 = σ (W2h1 + b2) ,
...
hL = σ (WLhL−1 + bL) ,
y = WL+1hL + bL+1 ,
(16)
mapping the input x to several intermediate
feature representations hl, until the output y is
obtained by a linear regression on the features
hL in the ﬁnal layer. For PES construction, typ-
ically, the NN maps a representation of chemical
structure x to a one-dimensional output repre-
senting the energy. Contrary to the coeﬃcients
α in kernel methods (see Eq. 10), the parame-
ters {Wl, bl}L+1
l=1 of an NN cannot be ﬁtted in
closed form. Instead, they are initialized ran-
domly and optimized (usually using a variant
of stochastic gradient descent) to minimize a
loss function that measures the discrepancy be-
tween the output of the NN and the reference
data.156 A common choice is the mean squared
error (MSE), which is also used in kernel meth-
ods. During training, the loss and its gradient
are estimated from randomly drawn batches of
training data, making each step independent of
the number of training data M. On the other
hand, ﬁnding the coeﬃcients for kernel methods
scales as O(M 3) due to the need of inverting
the M × M kernel matrix. Evaluating an NN
according to Eq. 16 for a single input x scales
linearly with respect to the number of model
parameters. The same is true for kernel meth-
ods, but here the number of model parameters
is tied to the number of reference data M used
for training the model (see Eq. 2), which means
that evaluating kernel methods scales O(M).
As the evaluation cost of NNs is independent
of M and only depends on the chosen architec-
ture, they are typically the method of choice for
learning large datasets. A schematic overview of
the mathematical concepts behind NNs is given
in Fig. 8.
2.2.3
Model selection:
How to choose
hyperparameters
In addition to the parameters that are deter-
mined when learning an ML model for a given
dataset, e.g. the weights W and biases b in NNs
or the regression coeﬃcients α in kernel meth-
ods, many models contain hyperparameters that
need to be chosen before training. They allow
to tune a given model to the prior beliefs about
the dataset/underlying physics and thus play a
signiﬁcant role in how a model generalizes to
diﬀerent data patterns. Two types of hyperpa-
rameters can be distinguished: The ﬁrst kind
inﬂuences the composition of the model itself,
such as the type of kernel or the NN architec-
ture, whereas the second kind aﬀects the train-
ing procedure and thus the ﬁnal parameters of
the trained model. Examples for hyperparame-
ters are the width (number of neurons per layer)
and depth (number of hidden layers) of an NN,
the kernel width γ (see Eq. 4), or the strength
of regularization terms (e.g. λ in Eq. 10).
The range of valid values is strongly depen-
dent on the hyperparameter in question. For
example, certain hyperparameters might need to
be selected from the positive real numbers (e.g.
γ and λ, see above), while others are restricted
to positive integers or have interdependencies
(such as depth and width of an NN). This is why
hyperparameters are often optimized with prim-
15

Figure 9: Overview of model selection process.
itive exhaustive search schemes like grid search
or random search in combination with educated
guesses for suitable search ranges, or more so-
phisticated Bayesian approaches.157 Common
gradient-based optimization methods can typi-
cally not be applied eﬀectively. Fortunately, for
many hyperparameters, model performance is
fairly robust to small changes and good default
values can be determined which work across
many diﬀerent datasets.
Before any hyperparameters may be optimized,
a so-called test set must be split oﬀfrom the
available reference data and kept strictly sepa-
rate. The remainder of the data is further di-
vided into a training and a validation set. This
is done because the performance of ML models
is not judged by how well they predict the data
they were trained on, as it is often possible to
achieve arbitrarily small errors in this setting.
Instead, the generalization error, i.e. how well
the model is able to predict unseen data, is taken
as indicator for the quality of a model. For this
reason, for every trial combination of hyperpa-
rameters, a model is trained on the training data
and its performance measured on the validation
set to estimate the generalization error. Finally,
the best performing model is selected. To get
better statistics for estimates of the generaliza-
tion error, instead of splitting the remaining
data (reference data excluding test set) into just
two parts, it is also possible to divide it into k
parts (or folds). Then, a total of k models is
trained, each using k−1 folds as the training set
and the last fold as validation set. This method
is known as k-fold cross validation.30,158
As the validation data inﬂuences model se-
lection (even though it is not used directly in
the training process), the validation error may
give too optimistic estimates and is no reliable
way to judge the true generalization error of the
ﬁnal model. A more realistic value can be ob-
tained by evaluating the model on the held-out
test set, which has neither direct nor indirect
inﬂuence on model selection. To not invalidate
this estimate, it is crucial not to further tweak
any parameters or hyperparameters in response
to test set performance. More details on how
to construct ML models (including the selec-
tion of hyperparameters and the importance of
keeping an independent test set) can be found
in Section 3. The model selection process is
summarized in Fig. 9.
2.3
Combining machine learning
and chemistry
The need for ML methods often arises from the
lack of theory to describe a desired mapping be-
tween input and output. A classical example for
this is image classiﬁcation: It is not clear how to
distinguish between pictures of diﬀerent objects,
as it is unfeasible to formulate millions of rules
by hand to solve this task. Instead, the best
results are currently achieved by learning sta-
tistical image characteristics from hundreds of
thousands of examples that were extracted from
a large dataset representing a particular object
class. From that, the classiﬁer learns to estimate
the distribution inherent to the data in terms of
feature extractors with learned parameters like
16

convolution ﬁlters that reﬂect diﬀerent scales of
the image statistics.94,98,101 This working princi-
ple represents the best approach known to date
to tackle this particular challenge in the ﬁeld of
computer vision.
On the other hand, the benchmark for solving
molecular problems is set by rigorous physical
theory that provides essentially exact descrip-
tions of the relationships of interest. While the
introduction of approximations to exact theories
is common practice and essential to reduce their
complexity to a workable level, those simpliﬁ-
cations are always physical or mathematical in
nature. This way, the generality of the theory is
only minimally compromised, albeit with the in-
evitable consequence of a reduction in predictive
power. In contrast, statistical methods can be
essentially exact, but only in a potentially very
narrow regime of applicability. Thus, a main
role of ML algorithms in the chemical sciences
has been to shortcut some of the computational
complexity of exact methods by means of em-
pirical inference, as opposed to providing some
mapping between input and output at all (as
is the case for image classiﬁcation). Notably,
recent developments could show that machine
learning can provide novel insight beyond pro-
viding eﬃcient shortcuts of complex physical
computations.33,55,59,62,70,105,159,160
Force ﬁeld construction poses unique chal-
lenges that are absent from traditional ML ap-
plication domains, as much more stringent de-
mands on accuracy are placed on ML approaches
that attempt to oﬀer practical alternatives to
established methods.
Additionally, consider-
able computational cost is associated with the
generation of high-level ab initio training data,
with the consequence that practically obtainable
datasets with suﬃciently high quality are typ-
ically not very large. This is in stark contrast
with the abundance of data in traditional ML
application domains, such as computer vision,
natural language processing etc. The challenge
in chemistry, however, is to retain the generality,
generalization ability and versatility of ML meth-
ods, while making them accurate, data-eﬃcient,
transferable, and scalable.
2.3.1
Physical constraints
To increase data eﬃciency and accuracy, ML-
FFs can (and should) exploit the invariances
of physical systems (see Section 2.1.2), which
provide additional information in ways that are
not directly available for other ML problems.
Those invariances can be used to reduce the
function space from which the model is selected,
in this manner eﬀectively reducing the degrees
of freedom for learning,69,161 i.e. making the
learning problem easier and thus also solvable
with a fraction of data. As ML algorithms are
universal approximators with virtually no inher-
ent ﬂexibility restrictions, it is important that
physically meaningful solutions are obtained. In
the following, important physical constraints of
such solutions and possible ways of their real-
ization are discussed in detail.
Furthermore,
existing kernel-based methods and neural net-
work architectures tailored for the construction
of FFs and how they implement these physical
constraints in practice are described.
Energy conservation
A necessary require-
ment for ML-FFs is that, in the absence of exter-
nal forces, the total energy of a chemical system
is conserved (see Section 2.1.2). When the po-
tential energy is predicted by any diﬀerentiable
method and forces derived from its gradient,
they will be conservative by construction. How-
ever, when forces are predicted directly, this
is generally not true, which makes deriving en-
ergies from force samples slightly more com-
plicated. The main challenge to overcome is
that not every vector ﬁeld is necessarily a valid
gradient ﬁeld. Therefore, the learning problem
cannot simply be cast in terms of a standard
multiple output regression task, where the out-
put variables are modeled without enforcing ex-
plicit correlations. A big advantage of predicting
forces directly is that they are true quantum-
mechanical observables within the BO approxi-
mation by virtue of the Hellmann-Feynman theo-
rem,162,163 i.e. they can be calculated analytically
and therefore at a relatively low additional cost
when generating ab initio reference data. As
a rough guideline, the computational overhead
for analytic forces scales with a factor of only
17

E : R3N →R
F : R3N →R3N
ˆfE
∇ˆfE
ˆfF

ˆfF
PES
FF
a posteriori
a priori
Energy conservation:
R = {⃗ri = (x, y, z)T
i }N
i=1
Figure 10: Diﬀerentiation of an energy estimator (blue) versus direct force reconstruction (red).
The law of energy conservation is trivially obeyed in the ﬁrst case, but requires explicit a priori
constraints in the latter scenario. The challenge in estimating forces directly lies in the complexity
arising from their high 3N-dimensionality (three force components for each of the N atoms) in
contrast to predicting a single scalar for the energy.
around ∼1–7 on top of the energy calculation.164
In contrast, at least 3N + 1 energy evaluations
would be necessary for a numerical approxima-
tion of the forces by using ﬁnite diﬀerences. For
example, at the PBE0/DFT (density functional
theory with the Perdew-Burke-Ernzerhof hybrid
functional) level of theory,165 calculating energy
and analytical forces for an ethanol molecule
takes only ∼1.5 times as long as calculating just
the energy (the exact value is implementation-
dependent), whereas for numerical gradients, a
factor of at least ∼10 would be expected.
As forces provide additional information about
how the energy changes when an atom is moved,
they oﬀer an eﬃcient way to sample the PES,
which is why it is desirable to formulate ML
models that can make direct use of them in the
training process. Another beneﬁt of a direct re-
construction of the forces is that it avoids the am-
pliﬁcation of estimation errors due to the deriva-
tive operator that would otherwise be applied
to the PES reconstruction (see Fig. 10).58,70,105
Roto-translational invariance
A crucial re-
quirement for ML-FFs is the rotational and
translational invariance of the potential energy,
i.e. E (R) = E (RR + T ), where R and T
are rigid rotations and translations and R are
the Cartesian coordinates of the atoms.
As
long as the representation x(R) of chemical
structure chosen as input for the ML model
itself is roto-translationally invariant, ML-FFs
inherit its desired properties and even the gradi-
ents will automatically behave in the correct
equivariant way due to the outer derivative
∂(x(RR + T )/∂R = R∂x(R)/∂R.
One ex-
ample of appropriate features to construct a
representation x with the desired properties are
pairwise distances. For a system with N atoms,
there are
 N
2

diﬀerent pairwise distances, which
results in reasonably sized feature sets for sys-
tems with a few dozen atoms. Apart from very
few pathological cases, this representation is
complete, in the sense that any possible conﬁg-
uration of the system can be described exactly
and uniquely.117 However, while pairwise dis-
tances serve as an eﬃcient parametrization of
some geometry distortions like bond stretching,
they are relatively ineﬃcient in describing oth-
ers, e.g. rotations of functional groups. In the
latter case, many distances are aﬀected even for
slight angular changes, which can pose a chal-
lenge when trying to learn the geometry-energy
mapping. Complex transition paths or reaction
coordinates are often better described in terms
of bond and torsion angles in addition to pair-
wise distances. The problem is that the number
of these features grows rather quickly, with
 N
3

and
 N
4

, respectively. At that rate, the size of
the feature set quickly becomes a bottleneck,
resulting in models that are slow to train and
evaluate. While an expert choice of relevant
angles would circumvent this issue, it reduces
some of the “data-driven” ﬂexibility that ML
models are typically appreciated for. Note that
models without roto-translational invariance are
practically unusable, as they will start to gener-
ate spurious linear and/or angular momentum
during dynamics simulations.
18

Indistinguishability
of
identical
atoms
In the BO approximation, the potential energy
of a chemical system only depends on the charges
and positions of the nuclei. As a consequence,
the PES is symmetric under permutation of
atoms with the same nuclear charge. However,
symmetric regions are not necessarily sampled
in an unbiased way during MD simulations (see
Fig. 11). Consequently, ML-FFs that are not
constrained to treat all symmetries equivalently
may (due to the uneven sampling) predict dif-
ferent results when permuting atoms. While it
Figure 11: Regions of the PESs for ethanol, keto-
malondialdehyde and aspirin visited during a
200 ps ab initio MD simulation at 500 K using
the PBE+TS/DFT level of theory166,167 (den-
sity functional theory with the Perdew-Burke-
Ernzerhof functional and Tkatchenko-Scheﬄer
dispersion correction). The black dashed lines
indicate the symmetries of the PES. Note that
regions related by symmetry are not necessarily
visited equally often.
is in principle possible to arrive at a ML-FF
that is symmetric with respect to permutations
of same-species atoms indirectly via data aug-
mentation29,168 or by simply using datasets that
naturally include all relevant symmetric conﬁg-
urations in an unbiased way, there are obvious
scaling issues with this approach. It is much
more eﬃcient to impose the right constraints
onto the functional form of the ML-FF, such
that all relevant symmetric variants of a cer-
tain atomic conﬁguration appear equivalent au-
tomatically. Such symmetric functions can be
constructed in various ways, each of which has
advantages and disadvantages.
Assignment-based approaches do not sym-
metrize the ML-FF per se, but instead aim to
normalize its input, such that all symmetric vari-
ants of a conﬁguration are mapped to the same
internal representation. In its most basic realiza-
tion, this assignment is done heuristically, i.e. by
using inexact, but computationally cheap crite-
ria. Examples for this approach are the Coulomb
matrix28 or the Bag-of-Bonds31 descriptors, that
use simple sorting schemes for that purpose. His-
tograms107,169 and some density-based117,170,171
approaches follow that same principle, although
not explicitly. All of those schemes have in com-
mon that they compare the features in aggregate
as opposed to individually. A disadvantage is
that dissimilar features are likely to be compared
to each other or treated as the same, which lim-
its the accuracy of the prediction. Such weak
assignments are better suited for datasets with
diverse conformations rather than gathered from
MD trajectories that contain many similar ge-
ometries. In the latter case, the assignment of
features might change as the geometry evolves,
which would lead to discontinuities in the pre-
diction and would eﬀectively be treated by the
ML model as noise (see ϵ in Eq. 1).
An alternative path is to recover the true
correspondence of molecular features using a
graph matching approach.172,173 Each input x
is matched to a canonical permutation of atoms
˜x = Px before generating the prediction. This
procedure eﬀectively compresses the PES to one
of its symmetric subdomains (see dashed black
lines in Fig. 11), but in an exact way. Note
that graph matching is in all generality an NP-
complete problem which can only be solved ap-
proximately. In practice, however, several al-
gorithms exist to ensure at least consistency in
the matching process if exactness can not be
guaranteed.174 A downside of this strategy is
that any input must pass through a matching
process, which is relatively costly, despite being
approximate. Another issue is that the bound-
aries of the symmetric subdomains of the PES
will necessarily lie in the extrapolation regime of
the reconstruction in which prediction accuracy
tends to degrade. As the molecule undergoes
symmetry transformations, these boundaries are
frequently crossed, to the detriment of predic-
tion performance.
Arguably the most universal way of impos-
19

ing symmetry, especially if the functional form
of the model is already given, is via invariant
integration over the relevant symmetry group
fsym(x) =
R
π∈S f(Pπx).
Typically, S would
be the permutation group and Pπ the corre-
sponding permutation matrix that transforms
each vector of atom positions x.
Some ap-
proaches117,175,176 avoid this implicit ordering
of atoms in x by adopting a three-dimensional
density representation of the molecular geom-
etry deﬁned by the atom positions, albeit at
the cost of losing rotational invariance, which
then must be recovered by integration. Invariant
integration gives rise to functional forms that
are truly symmetric and do not require any pre-
or post-processing of the in- and output data.
A signiﬁcant disadvantage is however, that the
cardinality of even basic symmetry groups is
exceedingly high, which aﬀects both training
and prediction times.
This combinatorial challenge can be solved
by limiting the invariant integral to the physi-
cal point group and ﬂuxional symmetries that
actually occur in the training dataset. Such a
sub-group of meaningful symmetries can be auto-
matically recovered and is often rather small.164
For example, each of the molecules benzene,
toluene and azobenzene have only 12 physically
relevant symmetries, whereas their full symmet-
ric groups have orders 6!6!, 7!8! and 12!10!2!
symmetries respectively.
2.3.2
(Symmetric)
Gradient
Domain
Machine Learning ((s)GDML)
Gradient domain machine learning (GDML) is
a kernel-based method introduced as a data ef-
ﬁcient way to obtain accurate reconstructions
of ﬂexible molecular force ﬁelds from small ref-
erence datasets of high-level ab initio calcula-
tions.105 Contrary to most other ML-FFs, in-
stead of predicting the energy and obtaining
forces by derivation with respect to nuclear co-
ordinates, GDML predicts the forces directly.
As mentioned in Section 2.3.1, forces obtained
in this way may violate energy conservation. To
ensure conservative forces, the key idea is to
use a kernel K (x, x′) = ∇xKE (x, x′) ∇⊤
x′ that
models the forces F as a transformation of an
unknown potential energy surface E such that
F = −∇E
∼GP

−∇µE, (x), ∇xKE (x, x′) ∇⊤
x′

.
(17)
Here, µE : RD →R and KE : RD ×RD →R are
the prior mean and covariance functions of the
latent energy-based Gaussian process GP, re-
spectively. The descriptor of chemical structure
x ∈RD consists of the inverse of all D pair-wise
distances, which guarantees roto-translational
invariance of the energy. Training on forces is
motivated by the fact that they are available
analytically from electronic structure calcula-
tions, with only moderate computational over-
head atop energy evaluations. The big advan-
tage is that for a training set of size M, only M
reference energies are available, whereas there
are three force components for each of the N
atoms, i.e. a total of 3NM force values. This
means that a kernel-based model trained on
forces contains more coeﬃcients (see Eq. 2) and
is thus also more ﬂexible than an energy-based
variant. Additionally, the ampliﬁcation of noise
due to the derivative operator is avoided.
A limitation of the GDML method is that the
structural descriptor x is not permutationally in-
variant, because the values of its entries (inverse
pairwise distances) change when atoms are re-
ordered. An extension of the original approach,
sGDML69,164 (symmetric GDML), additionally
incorporates all relevant rigid space group sym-
metries, as well as dynamic non-rigid symmetries
of the system at hand into the kernel, to further
improve its eﬃciency and ensure permutational
invariance. Usually, the identiﬁcation of sym-
metries requires chemical and physical intuition
about the system at hand, which is impractical
in an ML setting. Here, however, a data-driven
multi-partite matching approach is employed
to automatically recover permutations of atoms
that appear within the training set.164 A match-
ing process ﬁnds permutation matrices P that
realize the assignment between adjacency matri-
ces (A)ij = ∥⃗ri −⃗rj∥of molecular graph pairs
G and H in diﬀerent energy states
arg min
τ
L(τ) = ∥P(τ)AGP(τ)
⊤−AH∥2
(18)
20

and thus between symmetric transformations.177
The resulting approximate local pairwise assign-
ments are subsequently globally synchronized
using transitivity as the consistency criterion174
to eliminate impossible assignments. By limiting
this search to the training set, combinatorially
feasible, but physically irrelevant permutations
τ are automatically excluded (ones that are inac-
cessible without crossing impassable energy bar-
riers). Such hard symmetry constraints (derived
from the training set) greatly reduce the intrin-
sic complexity of the learning problem without
biasing the estimator, since no additional ap-
proximations are introduced.
2.3.3
Gaussian
approximation
poten-
tials (GAPs)
Gaussian approximation potentials (GAPs)178
were originally developed for materials such as
bulk crystals, but were later also applied to
molecules.179 They scale linearly with the num-
ber of atoms of a system and can accommodate
for periodic boundary conditions. Similar to
high-dimensional neural network potentials114
(see Section 2.3.4), GAPs decompose each sys-
tem into atom-centered environments i such that
its energy can be written as the sum of atomic
contributions
E =
N
X
i=1
Ei({rij}j∈[1,N]) ,
(19)
with rij = rj −ri and ri being the position of
atom i. A smooth cutoﬀfunction is applied to
the pairwise distances ∥rij∥to ensure that the
contributions Ei are local and no discontinuities
are introduced when atoms enter or leave the
cutoﬀradius. Even though such a decomposition
is inherently non-unique and no labels for atom-
wise energies are available in the reference data,
they can still be approximated by a Gaussian
process: The sum over atomic environments
can be moved into the kernel function, yielding
a kernel for systems x and x′ with N and N ′
atoms, respectively:
K(x, x′) =
N
X
i=1
N′
X
j=1
Klocal(xi, x′
j) .
(20)
Thus, reference energies for the whole system
are suﬃcient for the model to learn a suitable
energy decomposition into atomic environments.
Several descriptors and kernels for GAPs have
been developed based on a local “atomic density”
ρ(r) = P
j δ(r −rj). Initially, Bart´ok et al. 178
proposed to employ local atomic coordinates
projected onto a 4D hyper sphere. Since this pro-
jection can represent the volume of a 3D sphere,
the introduction of an additional radial basis can
be avoided. To achieve rotational invariance, the
bispectrum of 4D spherical harmonics of these
coordinates was used as a descriptor.
Alter-
natively, the SOAP (smooth overlap of atomic
positions) kernel117 is deﬁned as the integral
over rotations R of atomic densities
K(ρ, ρ′) =
Z
dR

Z
ρ(r)ρ′(Rr)dr

n
.
(21)
Given
smoothed
local
densities
ρ(r)
=
P
j exp(−γ∥r −rj∥2), it has been shown that
the SOAP kernel is equivalent to the linear
kernel over the SO(3) power spectrum and bis-
pectrum for n = 2 and n = 3, respectively.117
Both approaches are invariant to permutation
of neighboring atoms as well as the rotation of
the local environment. Further representations
include best matches of the atomic densities over
rotations176 and kernels for symmetry-adapted
prediction of tensorial properties.180,181
2.3.4
Neural Network Potentials
The ﬁrst neural network potentials (NNPs) used
a set of internal coordinates, e.g. distances and
angles, as structural representation to model the
PES.182–186 While being roto-translationally in-
variant, internal coordinates impose an arbitrary
order on the atoms and are thus not reﬂecting
the equivalence of permuted inputs. As a result,
the NNP might assign diﬀerent energies to sym-
metrically equivalent structures. Beyond that,
the number of atoms inﬂuences the dimension-
ality of the input x, limiting the applicability of
the PES to chemical systems of the same size.
Decomposing the energy prediction in the spirit
of a many-body expansion circumvents these
issues,187–189 however, it scales unfavorably with
system size and number of chemical species, be-
21

Figure 12: Overview of descriptor-based (top) and end-to-end (bottom) NNPs. Both types of
architecture take as input a set of N nuclear charges Zi and Cartesian coordinates ri and output
atomic energy contributions Ei, which are summed to the total energy prediction E (here N = 9,
an ethanol molecule is used as example). In the descriptor-based variant, pairwise distances rij
and angles αijk between triplets of atoms are calculated from the Cartesian coordinates and used
to compute hand-crafted two-body (G2) and three-body (G3) atom-centered symmetry functions
(ACSFs) (see Eqs. 22 and 23). For each atom i, the values of M diﬀerent G2 and K diﬀerent G3
ACSFs are collected in a vector xi, which serves as a ﬁngerprint of the atomic environment and is
used as input to an NN predicting Ei. Information about the nuclear charges is encoded by having
separate NNs and sets of ACSFs for all (combinations of) elements. In end-to-end NNPs, Zi is
used to initialize the vector representation x0
i of each atom to an element-dependent (learnable)
embedding (atoms with the same Zi start from the same representation). Geometric information
is encoded by iteratively passing these descriptors (along with pairwise distances rij expanded in
radial basis functions g(rij)) in T steps through NNs representing interaction functions Ft and
atom-wise reﬁnements Gt (see Eq. 25). The ﬁnal descriptors xT
i are used as input for an additional
NN predicting the atomic energy contributions (typically, a single NN is shared among all elements).
cause each term in the many-body expansion
has to be modeled by a separate NN.
Behler and Parrinello 114 were the ﬁrst to pro-
pose so-called high-dimensional neural networks
potentials (HDNNPs), where the total energy
of a chemical system is expressed as a sum over
atomic contributions E = P
i Ei, predicted by
the same NN (or one for each element). The
underlying assumption is that the energetic con-
tribution Ei of each atom depends mainly on its
local chemical environment. As all atoms of the
same type are treated identically and summa-
tion is commutative, the output does not change
when the input is permuted. Due to the decom-
position into atomic contributions, systems with
varying numbers of atoms can be predicted by
the same NNP. In principle, this framework also
enables transferability between system sizes, e.g.
a model can be trained on small systems, but
applied to predict energies and forces for larger
systems. However, this requires suﬃcient sam-
pling of the local environments to remove spu-
rious correlations caused by the training data
distribution, as well as corrections for long-range
eﬀects.
The introduction of HDNNPs inspired many
NN architectures that can be broadly cat-
egorized into two types.
Descriptor-based
NNPs116,190–192 rely on ﬁxed rules to encode the
environment of an atom in a vector x, which is
then used as input for an ordinary feed-forward
NN (see Eq. 16). These architectures include
22

many variants of the original Behler-Parrinello
network, such as ANI193 and TensorMol.194 On
the other hand, end-to-end NNPs,159,195–197 take
nuclear charges and Cartesian coordinates as in-
put and learn a suitable representation from the
data.
Many end-to-end NNPs have been inspired by
the graph neural network by Scarselli et al. 198
and were later collectively cast as message-
passing neural networks (MPNNs).197 In this
type of model, molecules are regarded as undi-
rected graphs, where atoms are represented by
nodes and interactions between them as edges.
By exchanging information between nodes along
edges (message-passing), complex chemical inter-
actions can be modeled. A prominent example
is the Deep Tensor Neural Network (DTNN).159
Since its introduction, this approach has been
reﬁned to create new architectures, such as
SchNet,109,199 HIP-NN115 or PhysNet.108 End-
to-end NNPs that do not directly fall into the
category of MPNNs are covariant compositional
networks that are able to employ features of
higher angular momentum200–202 as well as mod-
els using a pseudo-density as input.171
Because no ﬁxed rule is used to construct
descriptors, end-to-end NNPs are able to au-
tomatically adapt the environment representa-
tions x to the reference data (in contrast to the
descriptor-based variant). However, as long as
x is invariant with respect to translation, rota-
tion, and permutation of symmetry equivalent
atoms, both types of NNPs adhere to all physi-
cal constraints outlined in Section 2.3.1. NNPs
are commonly used to predict energies, while
conservative forces are obtained by derivation.
Despite being energy-based, it is still possible to
incorporate information from ab initio forces by
including them in the loss term optimized during
training. At this point, it should be noted that
the requirement for continuously diﬀerentiable
models excludes the use of certain activation
functions, for example the popular ReLU acti-
vation,203 when constructing ML-FFs based on
neural networks. To avoid discontinuities in the
forces, activation functions used for NNPs must
always be smooth.
Descriptor-based NNPs
The ﬁrst descriptor-
based NNP introduced by Behler and Par-
rinello 114 uses atom-centered symmetry func-
tions (ACSFs)116 consisting of two-body terms
G2
i =
X
j̸=i
e−η(rij−rs)2fcut(rij)
(22)
and three-body terms
G3
i = 21−ζ X
j,k̸=i
(1 + λ cos θijk)ζ e−η(r2
ij+r2
ik+r2
jk)
×fcut(rij)fcut(rik)fcut(rjk)
(23)
to encode information about the chemical envi-
ronment of each atom i. Here, rij is the distance
between atoms i and j, θijk the angle spanned
by atoms i, j and k centered around i, and the
summations run over all atoms within a cutoﬀ
distance rcut. As the atom order is irrelevant for
the values of G2
i and G3
i and only internal coor-
dinates are used to calculate them, all physical
invariants are satisﬁed. A cutoﬀfunction such
as
fcut(r) =



1
2

cos
 πr
rcut

+ 1

,
r ≤rcut
0 ,
r > rcut
(24)
ensures that G2
i and G3
i vary smoothly when
atoms enter or leave the cutoﬀsphere and the
parameters η, rs, ζ, and λ(= ±1) determine to
which distances, or combinations of angles and
distances, the ACSFs are most sensitive. When
suﬃciently many G2
i and G3
i with diﬀerent pa-
rameters are combined and stored in a vector xi,
they form a “ﬁngerprint” of the local environ-
ment of atom i. This environment descriptor is
then used as input for a neural network for pre-
dicting the energy contributions Ei of atoms i
and the total energy E = P
i Ei is obtained by
summation.
Since the ACSFs only use geometric infor-
mation, they work best for systems containing
only atoms of one element, for example crys-
talline silicon.114 To describe multi-component
systems, typically, the symmetry functions are
duplicated for each combination of elements and
23

separate NNs are used to predict the energy con-
tributions for atoms of the same type.204 Since
the combinatorial explosion can lead to a large
number of ACSFs for systems containing many
diﬀerent elements, an alternative is to modify
the ACSFs with element-dependent weighting
functions.205 Most descriptor-based NNPs, such
as ANI193 and TensorMol,194 use variations of
Eqs. 22 and 23 (sometimes allowing parame-
ters of ACSFs to be optimized during train-
ing) to construct the environment descriptors
xi. Diﬀerent ways to encode the structural in-
formation are possible, for example using three-
dimensional Zernike functions,190 or the coeﬃ-
cients of a spherical harmonics expansion,192 but
the general principle remains the same. Also,
while most descriptor-based NNPs use separate
parametrizations for diﬀerent elements, it is also
possible to use a single NN to predict all atomic
energy contributions.192 The common feature
for all variations of this approach is that the
functional form of the environment descriptor
is predetermined and manually designed.
End-to-end NNs
A potential drawback of
the previously introduced ACSFs is that they
must be chosen by an expert before training
the neural network. If the choice of symmetry
functions is poor, for example when the result-
ing descriptor is (nearly) identical for two very
diﬀerent structures, the expressive power of the
neural network and the achievable accuracy are
limited a priori. Additionally, a growing num-
ber of input dimensions can quickly become
computationally expensive, both for calculat-
ing the descriptors and for evaluating the NN.
This is especially the case when modeling multi-
component systems, where commonly orthog-
onality is assumed between diﬀerent elements
(which increases the number of input dimen-
sions) or the descriptors are simply weighted by
an element-dependent factor (which may limit
the structural resolution of the descriptor).
In contrast, end-to-end NNPs directly take
atomic types and positions as inputs to learn
suitable representations from the reference data.
Similar to descriptor-based NNPs, many end-to-
end NNPs obtain the total energy E as a sum
of atomic contributions Ei. However, those are
predicted from learned features xi encoding in-
formation about the local chemical environment
of each atom i. This allows them to adapt the
features based on the size and distribution of the
training set as well as the chemical property of
interest during the training process. The idea is
to learn a mapping to a high-dimensional feature
space, so that structurally (and energetically)
similar atomic environments lie close together
and dissimilar ones far apart.
Within the deep tensor neural network frame-
work,159 this is achieved by iteratively reﬁning
the atomic features xi based on neighboring
atoms. The features are initialized to x0
i = eZi,
where eZ are learnable element-dependent repre-
sentations that are updated for T ∈[3, 6] steps.
This procedure is inspired by diﬀusion graph
kernels206 as well as the graph neural network
model by Scarselli et al. 198. Many end-to-end
networks have adapted this approach which can
be written in general as
xt+1
i
= Gt
 
xt
i +
X
j̸=i
Ft  xt
i, xt
j, g(rij)

fcut(rij)
!
,
(25)
where the summation runs over all atoms within
a distance rcut and a cutoﬀfunction fcut ensures
smooth behavior when atoms cross the cutoﬀ.
Here, the “atom-wise” function Gt is used to re-
ﬁne the atomic features after they have been up-
dated with information from neighboring atoms
through the interaction-function Ft. Usually,
the interatomic distance rij is not used directly
as input to Ft, but expanded in a set of uni-
formly spaced radial basis functions108,109,159 to
form a vectorial input g(rij). Both Ft and Gt
functions are NNs with the speciﬁc implementa-
tions varying between diﬀerent end-to-end NNP
architectures. As only pair-wise distances are
used and the order of atoms is irrelevant due
to the commutative property of summation, the
features xi obtained by Eq. 25 are automati-
cally roto-translationally and permutationally
invariant (and thus also the energy predictions).
Gilmer et al. 197 have cast graph networks of
this structure as message-passing neural net-
works and proposed a variant that uses a set2set
decoder207 instead of a sum over energy contri-
24

butions to achieve permutational invariance of
the energy. SchNet109 takes an alternative view
of the problem and models interactions between
atoms with convolutions. The convolution ﬁlters
need to be continuous (to have smooth predic-
tions) but are evaluated at ﬁnite points, i.e. the
positions of neighboring atoms. To ensure rota-
tional invariance, only radial convolution ﬁlters
are used, leading again to an interaction function
that is a special case of Eq. 25.
While the previously introduced approaches
aim to learn as much as possible from the refer-
ence data, several models have been proposed to
better exploit chemical domain knowledge. The
hierarchical interacting particle neural network
(HIP-NN)115 obtains the prediction as a sum
over atom-wise contributions Et
i that are pre-
dicted after every update step t. A regularizer
penalizes larger energy contributions in deeper
layers, i.e. enforcing a declining, hierarchical
prediction of the energy. PhysNet108 modiﬁed
the energy function to include explicit terms for
electrostatic and dispersion interactions,
E =
N
X
i=1
Ei + ke
N
X
i=1
N
X
j>i
˜qi˜qjχ(rij) + ED3 , (26)
where ED3 is Grimme’s D3 dispersion correc-
tion,208 ke is Coulomb’s constant and ˜qi are
corrected partial charges predicted by the net-
work that are guaranteed to sum to the total
charge of the molecule. In an ablation study
on a dataset of SN2 reactions,209 it was shown
that the inclusion of long-range terms improves
prediction accuracy for energies and forces while
models without these terms show qualitatively
wrong asymptotic behavior.108
3
Best practices and Pit-
falls
A number of careful modeling steps are necessary
to construct an ML-FF for a particular problem
of interest (Fig. 13). Even before starting this
process, some forethought is appropriate due to
certain limitations of ab initio methods them-
selves. This section gives an overview about all
steps necessary to construct an ML-FF from
scratch and highlights possible “pitfalls”, i.e. is-
sues that may occur along the way, in particular
when the recommended practices are not fol-
lowed. First, some preliminary considerations,
which should be taken before starting with the
construction of an ML-FF, are discussed (3.1).
Next, basic principles for choosing an appropri-
ate ML method for a speciﬁc task are given (3.2).
Then, the importance of high quality reference
data, diﬀerent strategies to collect it (3.3), and
how the data has to be prepared (3.4), are out-
lined. This is followed by an overview of how to
train an ML model on the collected data (3.5)
and guidelines for using the trained ML-FF in a
production setting, e.g. for running MD simula-
tions (3.6). Finally, popular software packages
for constructing ML-FFs are brieﬂy described
and code examples are given (3.7).
3.1
Preliminary considerations
Before running any ab initio calculations to col-
lect data for training ML models, it is advisable
to think about the limitations of the chosen
level of theory itself. The issues discussed here
are problem-speciﬁc and often not unique to
ML-FFs, but PES reconstruction in general. As
such, a comprehensive list is not possible, but a
few examples are given below.
Practicability
On the spectrum of quantum
chemistry methods, ML-FFs ﬁt into the niche
between highly eﬃcient conventional FFs210 and
accurate, but computationally expensive ab ini-
tio methods.211 Eﬃciency-wise, they are still in-
ferior to classical FFs, because their functional
forms are considerably more complex and thus
more expensive to evaluate. Even the fastest
ML-FFs are still one to three orders of magni-
tude slower.164,212,213 On the other end, ML-FFs
are lower bounded by the accuracy of the refer-
ence data used for training, which means that
the underlying ab initio method will always be
at least equally accurate. In practical terms,
this means that in order to be useful, ML-FFs
need to oﬀer time savings over directly running
ab initio calculations and an improved accu-
racy compared to conventional FFs. For this
purpose, the full procedure of data generation,
25

Figure 13: Overview of the most important steps when constructing and using ML-FFs.
training and inference must be taken into ac-
count, as opposed to just regarding inference
speed, which will be much quicker than ab ini-
tio methods. While this consideration sounds
trivial at ﬁrst, it is still advisable to think about
whether constructing an ML-FF really is eco-
nomical. For example, if the goal is to run just
a single short MD trajectory, the question is
how much data is necessary for the model to
reach the required accuracy. Some models may
require several thousands of training points to
produce accurate enough predictions, even for
fairly small molecules. Then, when factoring
in the overall time required for going through
the process of creating the ML model, testing
it, and running the MD simulation, it might be
more eﬃcient to simply run an ab initio MD
simulation in the ﬁrst place. Further, not every
ML method is equally applicable or appropriate
for all systems due to methodical and/or concep-
tual constraints. Such limitations are discussed
in greater detail in Section 3.2.
Multireference eﬀects
Many ab initio meth-
ods use a single Slater determinant to express
the wave function of a system. The problem with
this approach is that diﬀerent determinants may
be dominant in diﬀerent regions of the PES, lead-
ing to a poor description of the wave function
if the wrong determinant is chosen. Especially
when many calculations are performed for vari-
ous strongly distorted geometries, for example
when a reaction is studied and bonds need to be
broken, it may happen that the solution “jumps”
discontinuously from one electronic state to an-
other, leading to inconsistent reference data.
When an ML model is trained on such a data
set, it will try to ﬁnd a compromise between
the inconsistencies and its performance typi-
cally be unsatisfying. It is therefore advisable
to check for possible multireference eﬀects prior
to generating data and, if necessary, switch to
a multireference method (for a comprehensive
review on multireference methods, see Ref. 214).
Strong delocalization
The models discussed
in this review all assume that energy contribu-
tions are local to some degree. This assumption
is either introduced explicitly by a cutoﬀradius,
or it enters the model through the use of a spe-
ciﬁc structural descriptor. For example, by using
inverse distances to encode chemical structures
for kernel methods (as is done e.g. in GDML, see
Section 2.3.2), relative changes between close
atoms are weighed more strongly when compar-
ing two conformations. While assuming locality
is valid in many practical applications, there
exist many cases where this assumption breaks
down. An example are extensive conjugated π-
systems, where a rotation around certain bonds
might break the favorable interaction between
electrons, leading to a “non-local” energy con-
tribution. If such eﬀects exist, an appropriate
model should be chosen, for example the cutoﬀ
radius may need to be larger than usual or a
diﬀerent structural descriptor must be picked.
3.2
Choosing an appropriate ML
method
Several diﬀerent variants of ML-FFs have been
discussed in Section 2.3 and many more are de-
scribed in the literature.
Although all these
methods can be applied to construct ML-FFs
for any chemical system, some methods might
be more promising than others for certain tasks.
For researchers who want to apply ML meth-
ods to a speciﬁc problem for the ﬁrst time, the
abundance of diﬀerent models to choose from
may be overwhelming and it might be diﬃcult
26

to ﬁnd an appropriate choice.
In the following, possible applications of ML-
FFs are broadly categorized based on simple
questions about the task at hand. For each case,
advantages and disadvantages of individual mod-
els are discussed to provide help and guidance to
the reader for identifying an appropriate model
for their use case.
How much reference data can be used for
training?
When in doubt which method to
use, a rule of thumb could be to prefer kernel
methods when there are less than ∼103–104
training points and NN-based approaches other-
wise (but this may also be a matter of prefer-
ence).
Depending on the desired accuracy,
the
amount of ab initio reference data which can be
collected within a reasonable time frame may be
vastly diﬀerent. For example, if reference calcu-
lations are performed at the DFT level of theory,
it is often feasible to collect several thousands of
data points, even for relatively large molecules.
On the other hand, if CCSD(T) accuracy and
a large basis set is required, already a few hun-
dred reference calculations for small molecules
can require a considerable amount of computing
time. Although it is of course always desirable
to perform as few reference calculations as possi-
ble, for some tasks, collecting a large data set is
unavoidable. For example, if a model should be
able to predict a variety of diﬀerent molecules
containing many diﬀerent elements, the relevant
chemical space must be sampled suﬃciently.
In general, kernel-based models tend to achieve
good prediction accuracies even with few train-
ing points, whereas NNs often need more data
to reach their full potential (although there may
be exceptions for both model variants, see also
Fig. 5). Further, the optimal model parameters
for kernel models can be determined analytically
(see Eq. 10), which, at least for small datasets,
is typically faster than training a NN via (a vari-
ant of) stochastic gradient descent. However,
when the data set size M is very large, solving
Eq. 10 analytically can become prohibitively ex-
pensive as it scales O(M 3) (and requires O(M 2)
memory to store the kernel matrix). Further,
evaluating kernel models scales with O(M) (see
Eq. 2), whereas the cost of evaluating NN-based
methods has (as long as the number of param-
eters does not have to be increased for larger
datasets) constant complexity. For this reason,
NNs tend to be more suitable for large datasets.
Note that there are approximations which im-
prove the scaling of kernel methods (so they can
be applied even to very large datasets) at the
cost of accuracy (see Eqs. 11-13).
Should the model be able to predict a
single type of chemical system or multiple
diﬀerent ones?
To be applicable to multiple
systems, a model must decompose its prediction
into atomic contributions. Models that use no
such decomposition must either use a ﬁxed size
descriptor or several separate models need to be
trained.
Some ML-FFs only need to be able to predict
systems with a ﬁxed composition and number
of atoms, for example to study the dynamics
of a single molecule, whereas other applications
require the ability to predict diﬀerent systems
with varying size, e.g. when clusters consisting
of a diﬀerent number and kind of molecules are
studied with the same model.
While all ML-FFs can be applied in the ﬁrst
case, the latter requires either that the length of
chemical descriptors is independent of the num-
ber of atoms, or that model predictions are de-
composed into local contributions based on ﬁxed-
size ﬁngerprints of atomic environments (which
naturally makes them extensive). Most NNPs
(see Section 2.2.2) and many kernel methods,
e.g. GAPs (see Section 2.3.3) or FCHL,106,107
use such a decomposition and can be applied
to diﬀerently sized chemical systems without
issues. An exception are e.g. (s)GDML models
(see Section 2.3.2), which encode chemical struc-
tures as vectors of inverse distances between
atomic pairs. Consequently, the length of the
descriptor changes with the number of atoms
and the model can only be applied to a single
type of system. In some special cases, it may be
possible to choose a maximum descriptor length
and pad descriptors of smaller molecules with
zeros, but this may introduce other problems
and/or reduce the accuracy.
27

Will the model be applied to single or
multi-component systems?
If only a
handful of elements is relevant, all models are
equally suitable. When a large number of ele-
ments needs to be considered, the model should be
able to encode and use information about atom
types eﬃciently.
As long as an ML-FF is only applied to single-
component systems (consisting of a single ele-
ment), for example elemental carbon or silicon,
all relevant information is contained in the rela-
tive arrangement of atoms and nuclear charges
need not be encoded explicitly. However, as
soon as there are multiple atom types (as is
common for most applications of ML-FFs), the
model must have some way to distinguish be-
tween them. A notable exception are some mod-
els such as (s)GDML, which use inverse pairwise
distances as structural descriptor. Here, infor-
mation about atom types is implicitly contained,
because speciﬁc entries always correspond to the
same combination of atom types.
Many local descriptors of atomic environments
only use geometric information in the form of
distances and angles between pairs and triplets
of atoms (see Eqs. 22 and 23). To include infor-
mation about atomic types, geometric features
have to be included separately for every possible
combination of elements, leading to a drastic
increase of descriptor size (descriptors for kernel
machines based e.g. on SOAP117 or FCHL106,107
also grow in size when the number of atom types
is increased). Many descriptor-based NNPs fur-
ther use separate NNs to predict atomic contri-
butions of diﬀerent elements (see Fig. 12). A
disadvantage of these approaches is that the
number of terms in the descriptor increases com-
binatorially with the number of elements covered
by the model (in particular if three-body or even
four-body terms are used), which impacts the
computational cost of training and evaluating
the model. Also, larger amounts of training data
may become necessary for good results. As long
as only a few elements need to be considered,
these downsides are not an issue, but if a model
for a signiﬁcant fraction of the periodic table
is required, a more eﬃcient representation is
desirable. Most end-to-end NNPs employ so-
called element embeddings (see Fig. 12), which
do not become more complex when the number
of elements is increased.
This has the addi-
tional beneﬁt of potentially increasing the data
eﬃciency of the model by utilizing alchemical
information. Another alternative is to introduce
element-dependent weighting functions (instead
of duplicating terms in ACSF descriptors).205
Will the model be applied to small or
large systems?
Models for very large target
systems should be able to exploit chemical local-
ity, so that reference calculations for fragments
can be used as training data. Additionally, this
allows trivial parallelization of predictions over
multiple machines.
Often, ML-FFs are used to study small or
medium-sized molecules. In such cases, all mod-
els are equally applicable. For very large systems
containing many atoms however, some methods
have particularly advantageous properties. For
example, it might be infeasible to run ab initio
calculations for the full target system. In this
case, being able to fragment the system into
smaller parts, for which reference calculations
are aﬀordable, is very useful.
To be trainable on such fragments, ML-FFs
must introduce an explicit assumption about
chemical locality by introducing a cutoﬀradius.
Every method that decomposes predictions into
a sum of local atomic contributions can thus
be trained in this way. ML-FFs without cutoﬀs
on the other hand need reference data for the
complete system (see above). Another advan-
tage of local models is that their predictions
are embarrassingly parallel: The contributions
of individual atoms can be calculated on sep-
arate machines (storing a copy of the model),
each requiring only information about neighbor-
ing atoms within the cutoﬀradius. Apart from
possible eﬃciency beneﬁts, this may even be-
come necessary if the computations to handle
all atoms do not ﬁt into the memory of a single
machine (for example when the system of inter-
est consists of millions of atoms215). Note that
while not all ML methods to construct FFs can
be parallelized in this way, most models contain
mostly linear operations, which are amenable to
other parallelization methods, e.g. by utilizing
GPUs (graphics processing units).
28

At this point, a subtle diﬀerence between
cutoﬀs used in NNPs of the message-passing
type (see Section 2.3.4) and descriptor-based
NNPs (as well as kernel machines based on local
atomic environments) should be pointed out. In
message-passing schemes, information between
all atoms within the cutoﬀradius is exchanged
over T iterations, thus the eﬀective cutoﬀradius
increases by a factor of T. This means that in or-
der to distribute the computation over multiple
machines, it is either necessary to communicate
updates to other machines after each iteration,
or a suﬃciently large subdomain needs to be
stored on all machines.
Are long-range interactions expected to
be important for the system of interest?
If strong long-range contributions to the energy
are present, it is advisable to either use a model
without cutoﬀs, or augment the pure ML ap-
proach by explicitly including physical interac-
tion terms.
As described earlier, many ML-FFs introduce
cutoﬀs to exploit chemical locality. An obvious
downside of this approach is that all interac-
tions beyond the cutoﬀcannot be represented.
For uncharged molecules without strong dipole
moments, relevant interactions are usually suﬃ-
ciently short-ranged that this is not problematic.
However, when strong long-ranged (e.g. charge-
dipole) interactions are important, cutoﬀs may
introduce signiﬁcant errors.
Models such as
(s)GDML, which consider the whole chemical
structure without introducing cutoﬀs, do not
suﬀer from this issue in principle.
While it is possible to simply increase the cut-
oﬀdistance until more long-ranged contributions
can be neglected, this decreases the computa-
tional and data eﬃciency of models which were
designed with cutoﬀs in mind. A better alter-
native could be to include the relevant phys-
ical interaction terms explicitly in the model.
For example, TensorMol194 and PhysNet108 in-
clude such correction terms by default, but other
models can be augmented in a similar fashion.
Although not strictly necessary, even models
without cutoﬀs may proﬁt from such terms by
an increased data eﬃciency.
3.3
Data collection
A fundamental component of any ML model
is the reference data.
While its architecture
and other technical details are responsible for
the potential accuracy of a model, the choice of
reference data and its quality deﬁnes the reli-
ability and range of applicability of the ﬁnal
model.
Any deﬁciencies that are present in
the data will inevitably also lead to artifacts
in models trained on it, a principle often collo-
quially stated as “garbage in, garbage out”.216
As such, the reference data is one of the most
important components of an ML-FF. The gen-
eration of datasets in computational chemistry
and physics are challenges on their own. First of
all, each reference point is a result of computa-
tionally expensive and often nontrivial calcula-
tions (see Section 2.1), which limits the amount
of data that can be collected. Furthermore, the
dimensionality of the conﬁgurational space of
molecules, solids, or liquids is so vast that – ex-
cept for trivial cases – it is not apparent how
to identify the representative geometries in the
ocean of possibilities. The optimal choice of ref-
erence data might even need to be adapted to the
individual properties of the respective ML model
that consumes it and/or its intended application.
In the following, several strategies for sampling
the PES and generating reference datasets are
outlined (multiple of these approaches can be
combined). Afterwards, problems that may oc-
cur due to insuﬃcient sampling are highlighted
and general remarks about the importance of a
consistent reference dataset are given.
AIMD sampling
A good starting point to as-
semble the reference dataset is by sampling the
PES using ab initio molecular dynamics (AIMD)
simulations. Albeit expensive in terms of the
amount of necessary reference calculations, this
technique constitutes a straightforward way to
explore conﬁgurational space. Here, the tem-
perature of the simulation determines which
regions of the PES and what energy ranges (ac-
cording to the Boltzmann distribution) are ex-
plored (see Fig. 14). For example, if the aim
is to construct an ML-FF for calculating the
vibrational spectrum of ethanol at 300 K, gen-
29

300K
500K
Methyl rotor
Hydroxyl rotor
Methyl rotor
Methyl rotor
00
180
360
180
360
00
180
360
180
360
00
180
360
180
360
100K
A) Sampling of conﬁgurational space
Potential energy [kcal/mol]
0
10
20
30
B) Energy 
            distribution
100K
300K
500K
Figure 14: A: Two-dimensional projection of the sampled regions of the PES of ethanol at 100 K,
300 K and 500 K from running AIMD simulations with FHI-aims217 (Fritz Haber Institute ab initio
molecular simulations) at the PBE+TS/DFT level of theory.166,167 The length of the simulation
was 500 ps. B: Distribution of sampled potential energies for the three diﬀerent temperatures.
erating the database at 500 K is a safe option
since the subspace of conﬁgurations relevant at
300 K is contained in the resulting database
(see Fig. 14A). Sampling at higher temperatures
ensures that the model does not enter the extrap-
olation regime during production runs, which is
practically guaranteed to happen when a lower
temperature is used for sampling. In general, the
resulting dataset will be biased towards lower
energy regions of the PES, where the system
spends most of the simulation time. For this
reason, pure AIMD sampling is only advisable
when the intended application of the ﬁnal ML
model involves MD simulations for equilibrium
or close to equilibrium properties, where rare
events do not play a major role. Examples of
this are the study of vibrational spectra, minima
population, or thermodynamic properties.
Sampling by proxy
Constructing reliable
reference datasets from AIMD simulations can
be computationally expensive. While system
size plays a major role, other phenomena, such
as the presence of intramolecular interactions
and ﬂuxional groups, can also inﬂuence how
quickly the PES is explored. Because of this,
long simulation times may be required to visit all
relevant regions. For example, generating 2×105
conformations from AIMD using a relatively af-
fordable level of theory (e.g. PBE+TS/DFT
with a small basis set) can take between a few
days to several weeks (depending on the size
Figure 15: Procedure followed to generate a
database at the CCSD(T) level of theory for
keto-malondialdehyde using sampling by proxy.
An AIMD simulation at 500 K computed at the
PBE+TS/DFT level of theory is used to sample
the molecular PES. Afterwards, the trajectory is
sub-sampled (black dots) to generate a subset of
representative geometries, for which single-point
calculations at the CCSD(T) level of theory
are performed (red dots). This highly accurate
reference data is then used to train an ML-FF.
30

of the molecule). With higher levels of theory,
the required computation time may increase
to months, or, when highly accurate methods
such as CCSD(T) are required, even become
prohibitively long (several years).
To resolve this issue, a possible strategy is
to sample the PES at a lower level of theory
to generate a long trajectory that covers many
regions on the PES. The collected dataset is
then subsampled to generate a small, but rep-
resentative set of geometries, which serve as
input for performing single-point calculations
at a higher level of theory (see Fig. 15). This
strategy works best when the PES has a similar
topology at both levels of theory, so it can be
expected that conﬁgurations generated at the
lower level are representative of conﬁgurations
that would be visited in an AIMD simulation
at the higher level (see the two-dimensional pro-
jections of the PES in Fig. 15). When the two
PESs are topologically very diﬀerent, e.g. when
a semi-empirical method or even a conventional
FF is used to generate the initial trajectory, it
may happen that the relevant regions of the PES
at the higher level of theory are not covered suf-
ﬁciently. Then, when an ML-FF is trained on
the collected dataset and used for running an
MD simulation, the trajectory may enter the
extrapolation regime and the model might give
unphysical predictions. Thus, extra care should
be taken when two very diﬀerent levels of theory
are used for sampling by proxy.
Adaptive sampling
Another method to min-
imize the amount of expensive ab initio calcula-
tions is called adaptive sampling or on-the-ﬂy
ML.218 Here, a preliminary ML-FF is trained
on only a small initial set of reference data and
then used to run an MD simulation. During
the dynamics, additional conformations are col-
lected whenever the model predictions become
unreliable according to an uncertainty criterion.
Then, new reference calculations are performed
for the collected structures and the training
of the ML model is continued or started from
scratch on the augmented dataset. The process
is repeated until no further unreliable regions
can be discovered during MD simulations.
When following this strategy, the quality of the
uncertainty estimate is crucial for an eﬃcient
sampling of the PES: If the estimate is over-
conﬁdent, deviations from the reference PES
might be missed. If the estimate is overly cau-
tious, many redundant ab initio calculations
have to be performed. There exist several ways
to estimate the uncertainty of an ML-FF. For
example, Bayesian methods learn a probability
distribution over models, which enables straight-
forward uncertainty estimates (see the predic-
tive variance of a Gaussian process, Eq. 9). For
models where an explicit uncertainty estimate
is not available, e.g. neural networks, a viable
alternative is query-by-committee.204,219 Here,
an ensemble of models is trained, for example
on diﬀerent subsets of the reference data and
each starting from a diﬀerent parameter initial-
ization. Then, the discrepancy between their
predictions can be used as uncertainty estimate.
Query-by-committee has been successfully em-
ployed to sample PESs using neural networks for
water dimers,220 organic molecules71,108 as well
as across chemical compound space.221 Other
alternatives, for example using dropout222 as a
Bayesian approximation,223 could also be used.
Collecting data “on-the-ﬂy” is even possible
without uncertainty estimates. Instead, addi-
tional reference calculations are performed at
ﬁxed intervals during the MD simulation.218,224
This relies on the assumption that the proba-
bility of reaching the extrapolation regime of
an ML model rises with increasing length of
the MD trajectory. While performing ab initio
calculations in regular intervals will discover all
deviations of the model eventually, this variant
of on-the-ﬂy ML does not exploit any informa-
tion about the already collected reference set
and may thus lead to many redundant data
points. More detailed reviews on uncertainty
estimation and active sampling of PESs can be
found in Refs. 225 and 226.
Metadynamics sampling
Similar to adap-
tive sampling, metadynamics sampling227,228
uses a preliminary ML-FF to run MD simu-
lations to ﬁnd structures for which to run refer-
ence calculations. However, the dynamics are
biased to increase the probability for visiting un-
explored regions on the PES. This is achieved by
31

placing “Gaussian bump functions” on the PES
in regions that have already been visited, i.e. the
potential energy of already known structures is
artiﬁcially raised. It is possible to combine meta-
dynamics with the uncertainty estimates used
in adaptive sampling to only select the most
relevant structures.
Normal mode sampling
It is also possible
to sample the PES without running any kind of
MD simulation. In normal mode sampling,193
the idea is to start from a minimum on the PES
and generate distorted structures by randomly
displacing atoms along the normal modes. They
are the eigenvectors of the mass-weighted Hes-
sian matrix obtained at the minimum position,
i.e. a harmonic approximation of the molecular
vibrations. From the associated force constants
(related to the eigenvalues), the increase in po-
tential energy for displacements along individual
normal modes can be estimated. Since they are
orthogonal to each other, it is straightforward to
combine multiple random displacements along
diﬀerent normal modes such that the resulting
structures are sampled from a Boltzmann dis-
tribution at a certain temperature. In other
words, structures generated like this are drawn
from the same distribution as if an “approxi-
mated PES” was sampled with a (suﬃciently
long) MD simulation. This approximated PES is
equivalent to a Taylor expansion of the original
PES around the minimum position, truncated
after the quadratic term (the contribution of the
linear term vanishes at extrema).
Structures generated from random normal
mode sampling are not correlated, in contrast
to those obtained from adjacent time steps in
MD simulations, which makes this approach an
eﬃcient way to explore the PES. However, the
disadvantage is that only regions close to min-
ima can be sampled. Additionally, the harmonic
approximation is only valid for small distortions,
i.e. the larger the temperature, the more the sam-
pled distribution diverges from the Boltzmann
distribution on the true PES. Because of these
limitations, it is best to combine normal mode
sampling with other sampling methods, for ex-
ample to generate an initial reference dataset,
which is later expanded by adaptive sampling.
Figure 16: One-dimensional cut through the
PES of ethanol along the O–H bond distance
for diﬀerent ML-FFs (solid blue, yellow and or-
ange lines) compared to ab initio reference data
(dashed black line). Close to the region sampled
by the training data (range highlighted in gray),
all model predictions are virtually identical to
the reference method (see zoomed view). When
extrapolating far from the sampled region, the
diﬀerent models have increasingly large predic-
tion errors and behave unphysically.
Problems due to insuﬃcient sampling
Because their extrapolation capabilities are lim-
ited, ML methods only give reliable predictions
in regions where training data is present.229
When generating reference data, it is therefore
important that all regions of the PES that may
be relevant for a later study are sampled suﬃ-
ciently. For example, when studying a reaction,
the data should not only cover conﬁgurations
corresponding to educt and product structures,
but also the region around the transition state
and along the transition pathway. When the
reaction coordinate deﬁning the transition pro-
cess is already known, a straightforward way to
generate the reference data would be to sample
the transition path region. However, even when
an ML model can reproduce the entire reference
dataset with the required accuracy, it is still
possible to run into issues when the model is
used to study the reaction. If the rare transition
process was not sampled suﬃciently, it is not
guaranteed that MD simulations with the ML-
FF reproduce it correctly. The reference data
32

may be restricted to a speciﬁc subset of molecu-
lar conﬁgurations along the transition pathway.
Hence, the model can enter the extrapolation
regime somewhere between the boundary states
and the transition pathways generated by an
MD simulation might be unreasonable. Another
potential issue is that after passing the transi-
tion state region, typically, a large amount of
potential energy is converted to internal motions
such as bond vibrations. As a result, the eﬀec-
tive temperature deﬁned by the kinetic energy
exceeds the ambient conditions by orders of mag-
nitude. Even when using a thermostat in the
simulation, thermal energy increases so rapidly
that it may not be able to handle the increase
in temperature immediately. As a consequence,
the trajectory visits high-energy conﬁgurations,
which may not be included in the reference data,
and the model again has to extrapolate.
When ML-FFs enter the extrapolation regime,
i.e. they are used to predict values outside the
sampled regions of the PES, unphysical eﬀects
may be observed.
Consider for example the
dissociation of the O–H bond in the hydroxyl
group of ethanol (Fig. 16). Here, diﬀerent mod-
els were trained on data gathered from an MD
simulation of ethanol at 500 K and used to pre-
dict how the energy changes when the O–H
distance of the hydroxyl group is shortened or
elongated to extreme values well outside the
range sampled during the dynamics. In this
example, while the sGDML model is able to ac-
curately extrapolate to much shorter distances
than are present in the training data, it still
fails to predict the bond dissociation. The NNP
models (PhysNet and SchNet) exhibit qualita-
tively wrong short-range behavior and spurious
minima on the PES, which may trap trajecto-
ries during MD simulations. Because of these
limited extrapolation capabilities, it is advisable
to sample larger regions of the PES than are
expected to be visited during MD simulations,
so that there is a “buﬀer” and models never
enter the unreliable extrapolation regime during
production runs. For example, when an ML-FF
is to be used for a study at a temperature of
300 K, the PES should be sampled around 500 K
or higher.
Importance of data consistency
Although
it may appear trivial, it is crucial that all data
used for training a model is internally consis-
tent: A single level of theory (method and ba-
sis set) should be used to calculate the refer-
ence data. When multiple quantum chemical
codes (or even diﬀerent versions of the same
code) are used for data generation, it should be
checked that their output is numerically iden-
tical when given the same input geometry (if
they do not then this will eﬀectively manifest
itself like noisy outputs, severely deteriorating
the precision of the ML model). Further, many
ab initio codes automatically re-orient the input
geometry such that the principal moments of
inertia are aligned with the x-, y- and z-axes,
so extra care should be taken when forces or
other orientation-dependent quantities (i.e. elec-
tric moments) are extracted to verify they are
consistent with the input geometry. When some
calculation settings need to be adapted for a
subset of the data, e.g. for cases with diﬃcult
convergence, it is important to check that val-
ues computed with the modiﬁed settings are
consistent with the rest of the data. Addition-
ally, for training some ML models, it may be
essential that atoms are ordered in a particu-
lar way throughout the data set. For example,
the permutational symmetry of (s)GDML mod-
els is limited to the transformations recovered
from the training set, whereas the NN models
discussed in this review are fully agnostic with
respect to atom indexing.
3.4
Data preparation
After the reference data is collected, it has to
be prepared for the training procedure. This
includes splitting the data into diﬀerent subsets,
which are reserved for separate purposes. Some
models may also require that the data is pre-
processed in some way before the training can
start. In the following, important aspects of
these preparation steps are highlighted.
Splitting the data
Prior to training any ML
model, it is necessary to split the reference data
into disjoint subsets for training/validation and
testing (see Section 2.2.3).
While the train-
33

ing/validation set is used for ﬁtting the model,
the test set is only ever used after a model is
trained to estimate its generalization error, i.e.
to judge how well the model performs on un-
seen data.30,158 It is very important to keep the
two splits separate, as it is easily possible to
achieve training errors that are several orders
of magnitude lower than the true generalization
error when the model is not properly regular-
ized. Many models also feature hyperparame-
ters, such as kernel widths, regularization terms
or learning rates, that must be tuned by com-
paring several trained model variants on a third
dataset used purely for validation (a subset of
the training/validation set). Note that informa-
tion from the validation set will still enter the
model indirectly, i.e. it also participates in the
training process. This is why a strict separation
of the training/validation set from the test set
is crucial. Undetected duplicates in the dataset
can complicate splitting, as the contamination of
the test set with training data (“data leakage”)
might go unnoticed. In this case, the model is
eﬀectively trained on part of the test set and es-
timates of the generalization error might be too
optimistic and unreliable. Such a scenario can
occur even when no obvious mistakes were made,
e.g. when the structures for a dataset are sam-
pled by running a long MD simulation where
snapshots are written very frequently. Struc-
tures collected from adjacent time steps may be
highly correlated in this case and when splitting
the data randomly into training and test sets, a
large portion of both sets will be almost identi-
cal. In such a case, instead of using a random
split, a better approach would be to use a time-
split of the dataset,230 e.g. using the ﬁrst 80%
of the MD trajectory as the training/validation
set and reserving the last 20% for testing.
Data
preprocessing
Prior to training a
model, the raw data is often processed in some
way to improve the numerical stability of the
ML algorithm. For example, a common practice
is normalization, where inputs (or prediction tar-
gets) are scaled and shifted to lie in the range
−1 . . . 1 or to have a mean of zero and unit
variance. The constants required for such trans-
formations must never be extracted from the
complete dataset. Instead, only the training set
may be used to obtain this information.30,90,230
Otherwise, estimates of the generalization error
on the test set may be overconﬁdent (this is
another form of data leakage). While normal-
ization may be less common for the purpose
of constructing ML-FFs, any “data-dependent“
transformation must be done carefully. For ex-
ample, it may be desirable to subtract the mean
energy of structures from the energy labels in or-
der to obtain numbers with smaller absolute val-
ues (for numerical reasons). This mean energy
should be calculated only from the structures in
the training set.
If a model is trained using a hybrid loss that
incorporates multiple interdependent properties,
such as energy and forces, it is important to con-
sider the eﬀects of the normalization procedure
on the functional relationship of those values.
For example, multiplying the energy labels by
a factor requires that the forces are treated in
the same way, because the factor carries over
to the derivative (scaling energies and forces
by diﬀerent factors would therefore introduce
inconsistencies in the data). Also, while sub-
tracting the mean value from energy labels is
valid, it is not correct to add any constant to
the force labels, because that would translate
into a linear term in the energy domain (the
energy is related to the forces through integra-
tion). Consequently, the consistency between
both label types would be broken and an energy
conserving model would be incapable of learning.
Even when doing simple unit transformations,
care should be taken not to introduce any in-
consistencies. For example, when energy labels
are converted from Eh to kcal mol−1 and atom
coordinates from a0 to ˚A, force labels have to
also be converted to kcal mol−1 ˚A−1 so that all
data is consistent. Depending on which code
was used to obtain the reference data, it is even
possible that units for some labels must be con-
verted, because they may be given in diﬀerent
unit systems in the raw data (ab initio codes
often report energy and forces in atomic units,
whereas for coordinates, angstroms are popular).
34

3.5
Training the model
After the data has been collected and prepared,
the next step is training the ML-FF. During the
training process, the parameters of the model
are tuned to minimize a loss function, which
measures the discrepancy between the training
data and the model predictions. In some cases,
e.g. most kernel methods, the optimal solution
can be found analytically. When this is not pos-
sible, e.g. when training neural networks, the
parameters are typically optimized iteratively
by gradient descent or a similar algorithm. Be-
cause standard gradient descent tends to con-
verge very slowly, some authors have proposed
to augment it with terms mimicking momen-
tum231,232 or adaptive step sizes.233,234 Not only
training times, but also the achievable accuracy
varies greatly with diﬀerent optimization algo-
rithms, so it is best to try diﬀerent schemes (see
Ref. 235 for an overview over diﬀerent popular
methods). A good default choice is the Adam
optimizer,236 which converges quickly and gives
good results for many diﬀerent NN architectures.
The hyperparameters of a model (e.g. the num-
ber of layers or their width in the case of NNs)
can also be selected in this step, albeit by check-
ing the model performance on the validation set
after training (instead of optimizing them di-
rectly). This section details the training process
and highlights important points to consider, e.g.
the choice of loss function or how to prevent
overﬁtting of the model to the training data.
Choosing the loss function
For regression
tasks, a standard choice for the loss function
is the mean squared error (MSE) given by
L = 1
N
PN
i=1(yi −ˆyi)2, because it punishes out-
liers disproportionately. Here, the index i runs
over all M samples of the training data, yi is
the reference value for data point i and ˆyi is
the corresponding model prediction. When the
MSE is used as loss function, it is implicitly
assumed that any noise present in the reference
data is distributed normally, which without ad-
ditional information, is a sensible guess for most
data. Further, the MSE loss allows ﬁnding the
optimal parameters analytically (due to convex-
ity) for linear ML algorithms, such as kernel
ridge regression (see Eq. 10 in Section 2.2.1).
However, the MSE is not necessarily the best
choice for all cases. For example, to make the
model less sensitive to outliers, a common alter-
native is to use a mean absolute error (MAE)
loss given by L = 1
N
PN
i=1|yi −ˆyi|. Other func-
tional forms, such as Huber loss237 or even an
adaptive loss,238 are also possible, provided they
are a meaningful measure of model performance.
After deciding on the general form of the loss
function, the question remains which labels y
to use as a reference. While the potential en-
ergy is an obvious choice, in classical MD, the
PES is explored via integration of Newton’s sec-
ond law of motion, which exclusively involves
atomic forces. Since an important objective of
ML-FFs is to reproduce the dynamical behav-
ior of molecules in MD simulations as well as
possible, it could even be argued that accurate
force predictions should take priority over en-
ergy predictions in MD applications. However,
since energy labels are usually available as a
byproduct of force calculations, it seems rea-
sonable to include both label types in the hope
that this will help improve the overall predic-
tion performance for both quantities. This gives
rise to models based on hybrid loss functions
that simultaneously penalize force F and energy
E training errors. Assuming an MSE loss, it
generally takes the form
L = 1
N
N
X
i=1
∥ˆFi −Fi∥2
|
{z
}
LFi
+η ( ˆEi −Ei)2
|
{z
}
LEi
,
(27)
where the hyperparameter η determines the rel-
ative weighting between both loss terms to ac-
count for diﬀerences in units, information con-
tent, and noise level of the label types. A bilat-
eral reduction of both loss terms is only possible
if the objectives are non-competing, i.e. when
the optimal parameter set is equally eﬀective
across both tasks. For this to be true, it must
hold that
∥ˆFi −Fi∥2 =η( ˆEi −Ei)2 ,
⇒∥−∇R( ˆEi −Ei)∥2 =η( ˆEi −Ei)2
(28)
at every training point i (here, the relation F =
35

−∇RE was substituted). Otherwise, the objec-
tives LFi and LEi are necessarily minimized by a
diﬀerent set of model parameters. Eq. 28 is only
true in general when LEi = LFi = 0 for all i,
which is not fulﬁlled in practice, because both
labels may contain noise and they can usually
not be ﬁtted perfectly. A model trained using a
hybrid loss (Eq. 27) will thus have to compro-
mise between fulﬁlling both objectives on the
training data, as opposed to joining energy and
force labels for a performance gain on both. For
this reason, the use of hybrid loss functions (or
how to weight diﬀerent contributions) warrants
careful consideration depending on the intended
application of the ﬁnal model. Some models,
e.g. (s)GDML (see 2.3.2), do not even include
energy constraints in their loss function at all
and are trained on forces only. The energy can
still be recovered via integration, but it does
not participate in the training procedure except
for determining the integration constant. In the
end, the ultimate measure of a model’s quality
should not be how well it minimizes a particular
loss function, but instead how well it is able
to reproduce the experimental observables of
interest. Also, it is important to keep in mind
that the loss function measured on the training
data is only a proxy for the true objective of any
model, which is to generalize to unseen data.
Compromising between the energy and force
labels of the training data can even improve pre-
diction accuracy for both label types on unseen
data. For a more thorough discussion on the
role of gradient reference data and how it can
improve prediction performance, see Ref.239–241
Tuning
hyperparameters
Hyperparame-
ters, such as kernel widths or the depth and
width of a neural network, are typically opti-
mized independently of the parameters that
determine the model ﬁt to the data: A hyper-
parameter conﬁguration is chosen, the model
is trained, and its performance is measured on
the validation set. This process is repeated for
as many trials as are aﬀordable or until the
desired accuracy is reached. Here it is crucial
that no test data is used to measure model
performance when tuning hyperparameters, so
the ability to estimate the generalization error
on the test set is not compromised. Choosing
good values for the hyperparameter regimes
requires some experience and intuition of the
problem at hand. Fortunately, many models are
quite robust and good default hyperparameters
exist, which do not require any further tuning to
arrive at good results. In other cases, hyperpa-
rameter tuning can be automated (for example
via grid or random search30,90,149,164,242) and
does not need to be performed manually. See
also Section 2.2.3 for a more detailed discussion
on tuning hyperparameters.
Regularization
Because ML models contain
many parameters (sometimes even more than
the number of data points used for training),
it is possible or even likely that they “over-
ﬁt” to the training data. An overﬁtted model
achieves low prediction errors on the training set,
but performs signiﬁcantly worse on unseen data
(Fig. 17A). The aim of regularization methods
is to prevent this unwanted eﬀect by limiting or
decreasing the complexity of a model.
When the loss function is minimized itera-
tively by gradient descent or similar algorithms,
as is common practice for training NNs, one of
the most simple methods to prevent overﬁtting
is early stopping 243): In the beginning of the
training process, prediction errors typically de-
crease on both training and validation data. At
some point however, because the validation set
is not used to directly optimize parameters, the
performance on the training data will continue
to improve, whereas the loss measured on the
validation set will stagnate at a constant value
or even begin to increase again. This indicates
that the model starts overﬁtting. Early stop-
ping simply halts the training process as soon as
the validation error converges (instead of wait-
ing for convergence of the training error), see
Fig. 17B. Early stopping also limits the size of
the neural network weights and thus implicitly
limits the complexity of the underlying function
class. Similar to tuning hyperparameters, only
the validation set, but never the test set, must
be used for determining the stopping point.
Another method of regularization is the intro-
duction of penalty terms to the loss function.
Since overﬁtted models often are characterized
36

r
V(r)
true V(r)
underfitting
overfitting
good fit
training data
training progression
loss
early
stopping
training set
validation set
A
B
Figure 17: A: One-dimensional cut through a
PES predicted by diﬀerent ML models. The
overﬁtted model (red line) reproduces the train-
ing data (black dots) faithfully, but oscillates
wildly in between reference points, leading to
“holes” (spurious minima) on the PES. During
an MD simulation, trajectories may become
trapped in these regions and produce unphysi-
cal structures (inset). The properly regularized
model (green line) may not reproduce all train-
ing points exactly, but ﬁts the true PES (gray
line) well, even in regions where no training data
is present. However, too much regularization
may lead to underﬁtting (blue line), i.e. the
model becomes unable to reproduce the train-
ing data at all. B: Typical progress of the loss
measured on the training set (blue) and on the
validation set (orange) during the training of
a neural network. While the training loss de-
creases throughout the training process, the val-
idation loss saturates and eventually increases
again, which indicates that the model starts
to overﬁt. To prevent overﬁtting, the training
can be stopped early once the minimum of the
validation loss is reached (dotted vertical line).
by high variance in the prediction (see Fig. 17A),
the idea is to penalize large model parame-
ters. For example, L2 regularization (adding the
squared magnitude of parameters to the loss)
shrinks the L2-norm of the parameter vectors
towards zero and prevents very large parameter
values. On the other hand, L1 regularization
(adding the absolute values of parameters to
the loss) shrinks their L1-norm, i.e. it favors
sparse parameter combinations. Typically, the
regularization term is weighted by an additional
hyperparameter λ that determines its strength
(like all hyperparameters, λ has to be tuned on
the validation set). Note that solving Eq. 10 to
determine the parameters of a kernel method
will result in an L2-regularized model trained
on the MSE loss function.
3.6
Using ML-FFs in production
The main motivation for training an ML-FF
is to use it for some production task, such as
running an MD simulation.
Before doing so
however, it is advisable to verify that it fulﬁlls
the accuracy requirements for its intended ap-
plication. At this point in time, the test set
becomes important: Since it was neither used
directly nor indirectly during the training pro-
cess, the data in the test set allows to estimate
the performance of a model on truly unseen
data, i.e. how well it generalizes. For this, it is
common practice to compute summary errors on
the test set, for example the mean absolute error
(MAE) or root mean squared error (RMSE), as
a measure of the overall accuracy of a model. In
general, such a way of quantifying accuracy gives
an overview of the ML model’s performance on
the given dataset and provides a simple way to
benchmark.
However, summary errors are biased towards
the densely sampled regions of the PES, whereas
much larger errors can be expected for less pop-
ulated regions. Therefore, while summary er-
rors measured on the test set are typically a
good indicator for the quality of a model, they
are not necessarily the best way to judge how
well an ML-FF performs at its primal objec-
tive, namely capturing the relevant quantum
interactions present in the original molecular
system. In other words, performance measures
evaluated on the test set should not be trusted
blindly. They are only reliable when the test
set is representative of the new data encoun-
tered during production tasks, i.e. when they
are drawn from the same distribution. When
a model has to extrapolate, it might give un-
reliable predictions, even when its performance
on the test set is satisfactory. When in doubt,
especially when an ML-FF is used for a diﬀerent
task than it was originally constructed for, it is
better to collect a few new reference data points
to verify that a model is still valid for its use case.
37

Because of the generally limited extrapolation
capabilities of ML models, results obtained from
studies with ML-FFs should always be scruti-
nized more carefully than e.g. results obtained
with conventional FFs. For example, it is advis-
able to randomly select a few trajectories and
verify that the sampled structures look “physi-
cally sensible”, e.g. no extremely short or long
bonds are present and atoms have no unusual
valencies. Since the PES is a high-dimensional
object, rare events, where a trajectory visits a
part of conﬁgurational space that is not sampled
in the reference data, are always possible, even
when the PES was carefully sampled. If any
questionable model predictions are found, it is
advisable to double-check their accuracy with
additional reference calculations.
3.7
Example code and software
packages
While many modern ML-FFs are conceptu-
ally simple, their implementation is often not
straightforward, involving many intricate details
that can not be exhaustively covered in publica-
tions. Instead, those details are best conveyed
by a reference implementation of the respective
model. Publicly available well maintained codes
allow to replicate numerical experiments and to
build on top of existing models with minimal
eﬀort.
In
this
section,
example
code
snippets
for training and evaluating kernel- and NN-
based ML-FFs with the sGDML164 (3.7.1) and
SchNetPack244 (3.7.2) software packages are
given. This is followed by a short description
of other popular software packages for the con-
struction of ML-FFs (3.7.3) as a ﬁrst orientation
for interested readers. Note that the list is not
comprehensive and many other similar packages
exist.
3.7.1
The sGDML package
A reference implementation of the (s)GDML
model is available as Python software pack-
age at http://www.sgdml.org.164 It includes
a command-line interface that guides the user
through the complete process of model creation
and testing, in an eﬀort to make this ML ap-
proach accessible to broad practitioners. Inter-
faces to the Atomic Simulation Environment
(ASE)245 or i-PI246 make it straightforward to
perform MD simulations, vibrational analyses,
structure optimizations, nudged elastic band
computations, and more.
To get started, only user-provided reference
data is needed, speciﬁcally a set of Cartesian
geometries with corresponding total energy and
atomic-force labels. Force labels are necessary,
because sGDML implements energy conserva-
tion as an explicit linear operator constraint by
modeling the FF reconstruction as the trans-
formation of an underlying energy model (see
Section 2.3.2). The trained model will give pre-
dictions at the accuracy of the reference data
and can be queried like any other FF.
Dataset preparation
The sGDML package
uses a proprietary format for its datasets, but
scripts to import and export to all ﬁle types
supported by the ASE package,245 which cov-
ers most popular standards, are included. To
convert a <dataset>, simply call
sgdml_dataset_via_ase.py <dataset>
and follow the instructions.
Training
The most convenient way to recon-
struct a FF is via the command line interface:
sgdml all <dataset> <ntrain> <nvalid>
This command will automatically generate a
fully trained and cross-validated model and save
it to a ﬁle, i.e. model selection and hyperparam-
eter tuning (see Section 2.2.3) are performed
automatically. The parameters <ntrain> and
<nvalid> specify the sample sizes for the train-
ing and validation subsets, respectively.
All
remaining points are reserved for testing. Each
subset is sampled from the provided reference
<dataset> without overlap.
Using the model
To use the trained model,
the sGDML predictor is instantiated from the
<model> ﬁle generated above and energy and
forces are queried for a given geometry (for ex-
ample stored in an XYZ ﬁle <xyz>):
38

import numpy
from sgdml.predict import GDMLPredict
from sgdml.utils import io
# Load model from file
parameters = numpy.load("<model>")
gdml = GDMLPredict(parameters)
# Load structure from xyz file
r,_ = io.read_xyz("<xyz>")
# Evaluate model
# (energies e and forces f)
e,f = gdml.predict(r)
It is also possible to run MD simulations us-
ing ASE and the Calculator interface included
with the sGDML package:
import ase
from sgdml.intf.ase_calc import \
SGDMLCalculator
from ase.md.velocitydistribution import \
MaxwellBoltzmannDistribution
# Load sGDML model as ASE calculator
calc = SGDMLCalculator("<model>")
# Load structure and attach calculator
atoms = ase.io.read("<xyz>")
atoms.set_calculator(calc)
# Initialize momenta at 300 K
MaxwellBoltzmannDistribution(
atoms, 300*units.kB)
# Setup MD using the velocity Verlet
# integrator and a time step of 0.2 fs
dyn = ase.md.verlet.VelocityVerlet(
atoms, 0.2*ase.units.fs,
trajectory="<trajectory>")
# Simulate for 1000 steps
dyn.run(1000)
To run this script, a trained model (<model>)
and an initial geometry (<xyz>) are needed.
The resulting MD trajectory is stored in a ﬁle
<trajectory>. For more details and applica-
tions examples, please visit the documentation
at www.sgdml.org/doc/.
3.7.2
The SchNetPack package
SchNetPack244 is a toolbox for developing and
applying deep neural networks to the atomistic
modeling of molecules and materials available
from https://schnetpack.readthedocs.io/.
It oﬀers access to models based on (weighted)
atom-centered symmetry functions and the deep
tensor neural network SchNet, which can be cou-
pled to a wide range of output modules to pre-
dict potential energy surfaces and forces, as well
as a growing number of other quantum-chemical
properties. SchNetPack is designed to be read-
ily extensible to other neural network potentials
such as the DTNN159 or PhysNet.108 It provides
extensive functionality for training and deploy-
ing these models, including access to common
benchmark datasets. It also provides an Atomic
Simulation Environment (ASE)245 Calculator
interface, which can be used for performing a
wide variety of tasks implemented in ASE. More-
over, SchNetPack includes a fully functional MD
suite, which can be used to perform eﬃcient MD
and PIMD simulations in diﬀerent ensembles.
As it is based on the PyTorch deep learning
framework,247 SchNetPack models are highly ef-
ﬁcient and can be applied to large datasets and
across multiple GPUs. Combined with the mod-
ular design paradigm of the code package, these
features also allow for a straightforward imple-
mentation and evaluation of new models. Simi-
lar to the sGDML package, the central commodity
for training models in SchNetPack is a dataset
containing the Cartesian geometries (including
unit cells and periodic boundary conditions, if
applicable) and atom types, as well as the target
properties to be modeled (e.g. energies, forces,
dipole moments, etc.). More information can be
found in Ref. 244.
Dataset preparation
SchNetPack uses an
adapted version of the ASE database format
to handle reference data. The package provides
several routines for preparing custom datasets,
as well as a range of pre-constructed dataset
classes for popular benchmarks (e.g. QM9248
and MD17105), which will automatically down-
load and format the data. For example, molecu-
lar data from the MD17 dataset can be loaded
39

via
spk_load.py md17 <molecule> <path>
where <molecule> indicates the molecule for
which data should be loaded (e.g. ethanol),
while the second argument speciﬁes where the
data is stored locally.
SchNetPack also provides a utility script for
converting data ﬁles in the extended XYZ for-
mat, which is able to handle a wide variety
of properties, to the database format used in-
ternally. Conversion can be invoked with the
command
spk_parse.py <input> <target>
where the arguments specify the ﬁle paths to
the <input> data ﬁle and <target> database
in SchNetPack format, respectively.
Training
As for the sGDML package, training
and evaluating ML models in SchNetPack can
be performed via a command line interface. For
example, a basic model can be trained with the
script:
spk_run.py train [model_type]
[dataset_type] <dataset> <model>
--split <ntrain> <nvalid>
Here, [model type] speciﬁes which kind of
NNP to use (wacsf for a descriptor-based
NNP using wACSFs,205 or schnet for the
SchNet109 end-to-end NNP architecture) and
[dataset type] speciﬁes either a preexisting
dataset (e.g. qm9 or md17), or a custom dataset
provided by the user. The next two arguments
are the paths to the reference <dataset> and
the ﬁle the trained <model> will be written to.
The arguments <ntrain> and <nvalid> specify
the sample sizes for the training and validation
subsets, while the remaining points are reserved
for testing. SchNetPack oﬀers a wide range of
additional settings to modify the training pro-
cess (e.g. model composition, use of GPU, how
diﬀerent properties should be treated etc.), see
https://schnetpack.readthedocs.io/.
Using the model
Once a model has been
trained, it can be evaluated in several diﬀerent
ways. The most basic method is to perform
predictions via:
import torch
import ase
from schnetpack.data.atoms \
import AtomsConverter
# Load model from file
spk_model = torch.load("<model>")
# Set up converter for ASE atoms
converter = AtomsConverter()
# Load structure from xyz file
atoms = ase.io.read("<xyz>")
inputs = converter(atoms)
# Evaluate model and collect
# predictions in a dictionary
results = spk_model(inputs)
It is also possible to use the SchNetPack MD
suite to perform various simulations with the
trained model. Continuing the above example,
a basic MD run can be carried out as:
import ase
import schnetpack.md as md
# Set up the system using 1 replica
# (use n_replicas > 1 for PIMD)
md_system = md.System(n_replicas=1)
# Load structure from xyz file
atoms = ase.io.read("<xyz>")
md_system.load_molecules(atoms)
# Initialize momenta at 300 K
init = md.MaxwellBoltzmannInit(300)
init.initialize_system(md_system)
# Set up integrator
tstep = 0.2 # fs
integrator = md.VelocityVerlet(tstep)
# Prepare model for MD (specify
# units, required properties, etc.)
40

calculator = md.SchnetPackCalculator(
spk_model,
required_properties=["forces"],
force_handle="forces",
position_conversion=’A’,
force_conversion=’kcal/mol/A’)
# Combine everything
simulator = md.Simulator(
md_system, integrator, calculator)
# Simulate for 1000 steps
simulator.simulate(1000)
Simulations can be further modiﬁed via hooks,
which introduce temperature and pressure con-
trol, as well as various sampling schemes.
Further documentation of the code package
and usage tutorials can be found at https:
//schnetpack.readthedocs.io/.
3.7.3
Other software packages
AMP: Atomistic Machine-learning Pack-
age
AMP is a Python package designed to inte-
grate closely with the Atomistic Simulation Envi-
ronment245 (ASE) and aims to be as intuitive as
possible. Its modular architecture allows many
diﬀerent combinations of structural descriptors
and model types. The main idea of AMP is to
construct ML-FFs on-demand, i.e. simulations
are ﬁrst started with an ab initio method and
later switched to the ML-FF once the model is
suﬃciently accurate. The package is described
in greater detail in Ref. 190 and on its oﬃcial
website https://amp.readthedocs.io/.
ænet
The Atomic Energy NETwork (ænet)
package includes tools for constructing and
applying neural network-based ML-FFs.
It
is written in Fortran 95/2003 and utilizes ef-
ﬁcient BLAS (Basic Linear Algebra Subpro-
grams) and LAPACK (Linear Algebra PACK-
age) routines for performing linear algebra. A
Python interface is also included.
More de-
tails can be found on https://github.com/
atomisticnet/aenet/.
DeePMD-kit
The DeePMD-kit is a package
written in Python/C++ aiming to minimize the
eﬀort required to build deep NNPs with diﬀerent
structural descriptors. It is based on the Ten-
sorFlow deep learning framework249 and oﬀers
interfaces to the high-performance classical and
path-integral MD packages LAMMPS250 and
i-PI.246 More details on the DeePMD-kit can be
found in Ref. 251 or on https://github.com/
deepmodeling/deepmd-kit/.
Dscribe
Dscribe is a Python package for
transforming atomic structures into ﬁxed-size
numerical ﬁngerprints.252 These descriptors can
then be used as input for neural networks or ker-
nel machines to construct ML-FFs. Supported
representations include the standard Coulomb
matrix28 and variants for the description of
periodic systems,119 ACSFs,116 SOAP,117 and
MBTR.169 More details can be found on the
oﬃcial website https://singroup.github.io/
dscribe/ or in Ref. 252.
n2p2
The neural network potential package
(n2p2) allows to use existing parametrizations of
Behler-Parinello NNPs to predict energies and
forces (either with standalone tools or with the
LAMMPS MD package250), but it also provides
training tools for generating new potentials. It
is mainly written in C++. For further details,
refer to https://compphysvienna.github.io/
n2p2/.
PROPhet
The PROPerty Prophet (or short:
PROPhet) package uses neural networks to pre-
dict the relationship between chemical structure
and material properties. As such, it can also
be used to generate NN-based ML-FFs. It in-
cludes tools to automatically extract properties
of interest from the output ﬁles of several ab
initio codes and an interface to the LAMMPS
MD package.250 More details can be found on
https://biklooost.github.io/PROPhet/.
QML
QML is a toolkit for learning properties
of molecules and solids written in Python.253
It supplies building blocks to construct eﬃcient
and accurate kernel-based ML models, such as
diﬀerent kernel functions and premade imple-
mentations of many diﬀerent structural repre-
41

sentations, e.g. Coulomb matrix,28 SLATM,130
and FCHL.107 The package is primarily intended
for the general prediction of chemical proper-
ties, but can also be used for the construc-
tion of ML-FFs. For further details, refer to
the oﬃcial website https://www.qmlcode.org
or the github repository https://github.com/
qmlcode/qml/.
RKHS toolkit
The RKHS toolkit is mainly
intended for constructing highly accurate and
eﬃcient PESs for studying scattering reactions
of small molecules. As described in section 2.2.1,
the evaluation of kernel-based methods scales
linearly with the number of training points M
(see Eq. 2). By using special kernel functions and
precomputed lookup tables, the RKHS toolkit
allows to bring this cost down to O(log N).
However, it requires that the training data has
grid structure, which limits its applicability to
small systems, where it is meaningful to sample
the PES by scanning a list of values for each
internal coordinate. The implemented kernel
functions also allow to encode physical knowl-
edge about the long-range decay behavior of
certain coordinates, which enables accurate ex-
trapolation well beyond the range covered in
the training data. A Fortran90 implementation
of the toolkit can be downloaded from https:
//github.com/MMunibas/RKHS/ and the algo-
rithmic details are described in Ref. 254.
RuNNer
The RuNNer Code was the ﬁrst im-
plementation of high-dimensional neural net-
work potentials and the source code is freely
available. Details on how to obtain access can be
found on https://www.uni-goettingen.de/
de/560580.html.
TensorMol
The TensorMol package allows to
train NNPs that explictly account for electro-
static interactions. It is based on the TensorFlow
deep learning framework249 and includes an in-
terface to i-PI246 for performing path integral
simulations. For further information, refer to
Ref. 194 or https://github.com/jparkhill/
TensorMol.
4
Physical
and
Chemical
Insights
from
Machine
Learned Force Fields
In nature, the atoms in chemical systems are
in constant motion, giving rise to various con-
ﬁgurations and reactive events. A large num-
ber of experimental observations are not based
on a single molecule or atom, but instead on
ensembles of various species subject to exter-
nal conditions, such as temperature or pressure.
Consequently, properties associated with indi-
vidual structures are not suﬃcient to charac-
terize macroscopic systems. One way to com-
pute ensemble averages are molecular dynamics
(MD) simulations, where the time evolution of
a system is governed by the atomic forces de-
rived from its associated potential energy sur-
face (PES). From the ergodic hypothesis255 it is
known that the expected value of an observable
A can also be obtained from the time average
⟨A⟩t = T −1 PT
t=1 At, where At is the value of A
corresponding to the structure at time step t
of the dynamics trajectory and T is their total
number. Of course, this relation is valid only
when the dynamics is long enough to visit all
conﬁgurations of the system accessible under
the simulation conditions.
In order to obtain meaningful statistics with
MD simulations, many thousands (or millions)
of successive PES evaluations are necessary.
Due to their high computational cost, accurate
electronic structure PESs quickly become in-
tractable for such simulations, which is why
highly eﬃcient classical force ﬁelds (FFs) are
usually employed for running MD simulations.
However, this eﬃciency comes at a cost: Conven-
tional FFs completely neglect or misrepresent
some potentially relevant contributions to the
potential energy, such as polarization, charge
transfer, or electronic eﬀects, which limits their
usefulness in modeling complex chemical phe-
nomena. Machine-learned FFs (ML-FFs) oﬀer a
unique combination of computational eﬃciency
and high accuracy, opening up tantalizing new
possibilities in the simulation of the dynamics
of molecules, surfaces, materials and condensed
phases. They are able to model all chemical
42

interactions – including those that are typically
neglected by conventional FFs. The high accu-
racy of ML-FFs allows to obtain qualitatively
diﬀerent and novel insights, which would oth-
erwise only be accessible from computationally
infeasible ab initio MD (AIMD) simulations. In
the following, some chemical insights made pos-
sible by ML-FFs, which could not have been
obtained with conventional FFs, are highlighted
in greater detail. A brief overview is given in
Table 1. Note that the given examples represent
only a tiny fraction of the published literature,
an exhaustive list is beyond the scope of the cur-
rent review. Interested readers can ﬁnd further
examples in other review articles, e.g. in Refs.
256–258.
4.1
Electronic Eﬀects
A good example for the power of ML-FFs is a
recent study of the dynamics of small molecules
(malondialdehyde, ethanol, salicylic acid, parac-
etamol, aspirin) with atomic forces at CCSD(T)
quality.70 AIMD simulations were run at 500 K
at the PBE+TS/DFT level of theory166,167 and
the collected conﬁgurations randomly subsam-
pled to calculate energies and forces at the
CCSD(T) level of theory (reference data for
aspirin was calculated at CCSD accuracy). For
each molecule, an ML-FF was constructed from
1000 data points with the sGDML164 method
(see Section 2.3.2) and used to run MD simula-
tions at 300 K. Running simulations of this qual-
ity with ab initio methods is impossible, as they
would require up to a billion times more com-
putation time. Conventional FFs were shown
to be no viable alternative to ML-FFs, as they
do not adequately describe, or even completely
neglect, eﬀects which strongly inﬂuence the dy-
namics – and hence the properties – of the stud-
ied molecules (Fig. 18).
For example, in ethanol, the lone pairs of the
oxygen atom interact with the partially posi-
tively charged hydrogen atoms of the methyl
group. Due to this attraction, the conﬁgura-
tion where both lone pairs are adjacent to a
hydrogen atom is visited most frequently during
a dynamics simulation. Any derived property,
e.g. the Gibbs/Helmholtz free energy surface
Figure 18: Visualization of electronic eﬀects,
which are accurately modeled by ML-FFs, but
neglected by conventional FFs. Electron lone
pairs, hybridization changes and orbital do-
nation eﬀects all inﬂuence the dynamics of
molecules and hence the properties that are
computed from MD simulations. When predict-
ing, e.g. Gibbs/Helmholtz free energy surfaces
(FESs) or molecular spectra, neglecting them
will lead to qualitatively diﬀerent results.
(FES) or the infrared spectrum, is only accurate
when this eﬀect is properly described. Conven-
tional FFs do not account for lone pairs and are
thus unable to predict the molecular properties
correctly.
A similar eﬀect can be observed in malondi-
aldehyde. Here, the lone pairs of the two oxygen
atoms strongly repel each other, which drives
the dynamics away from conﬁgurations where
they are close.
While conventional FFs can
crudely model electrostatic repulsion between
the oxygen atoms with negative partial charges,
the steric contributions from the overlap of the
electron clouds is not described, causing a qual-
itatively diﬀerent dynamics.
Paracetamol is another molecule where lone
pairs inﬂuence the stability of speciﬁc conﬁgura-
tions: The partially positively charged phenyl-
hydrogen adjacent to the oxygen atom of the
acetamide group interacts with its lone pairs
and favors a speciﬁc dihedral angle. Addition-
ally, the nitrogen atom of the acetamide group is
43

Table 1: Overview of diﬀerent topics and applications of ML-FFs discussed in this section. In all
cases, the type of employed ML-FF is given along with the number of atoms of the largest system
used to study the respective phenomenon. The basic level of reference theory (neglecting basis sets
and dispersion corrections for clarity) are also reported.
Category
Reference
ML-FF
Max. Natoms
Reference theory
Electronic Eﬀects
Sauceda et. al.70
sGDML
21
CCSD(T), CCSD
Sauceda et. al.213
sGDML
21
CCSD(T), CCSD
Sauceda et. al.69
sGDML
21
PBE, CCSD(T), CCSD
Thermodynamics
Morawietz et. al.259
BP-NNP
6 912
RPBE, BLYP
Andrade et. al.260
DeepMD
426
SCAN
Deringer et. al.261
GAP
1 000
LDA
Behler et. al.262
BP-NNP
64
LDA
Bartok et. al.263
GAP
23 496
PW91
Deringer et. al.264
GAP
4 096
PW91
Bonati et. al.265
DeepMD
680
SCAN
Brickel et. al.212
PhysNet
6
MP2
Reactions
Unke et. al.266
RKHS
3
UCCSD(T)
Denis et. al.267
RKHS
3
UCCSD(T)-F12a
Lu et. al.268
PIP-NN
7
UCCSD(T)-F12a
Sweeny et. al.269
PhysNet
7
MP2
K¨aser et. al.270
PhysNet
7
MP2
Rivero et. al.271
PhysNet
19
M06-2X
Liu et. al.272
BP-NNP
38
RPBE
Nuclear Quantum Eﬀects
Chmiela et. al.105
GDML
21
PBE
Chmiela et. al.69
sGDML
21
CCSD, CCSD(T)
Sch¨utt et. al.273
SchNet
20
PBE
Sauceda et. al.160
sGDML
21
CCSD, CCSD(T)
Hellstr¨om et. al.274
BP-NNP
1 700
RPBE
Excited States
Chen et. al.275
HDNN
5
CASSCF
Westermayr et. al.276
NN
6
MR-CISD
Westermayr et. al.277
SchNet
6
MR-CISD, CASSCF
Spectroscopy
Gastegger et. al.71
BP-NNP
209
BLYP, BP86, B2PLYP
Yao et. al.194
BP-NNP
60
ωB97X-D
Raimbault et. al.278
SOAP
80
PBE
Sommers et. al.279
DeepMD
512
SCAN
44

sp2 hybridized, which allows conjugation to the
electrons in the phenyl system and leads to the
planar geometry of paracetamol. When the ni-
trogen hybridization state is changed to sp3, the
energetically favorable interaction is broken and
corresponding conﬁgurations are thus rarely vis-
ited during room temperature dynamics. How-
ever, at higher temperatures, the hybridization
state may switch frequently – conventional FFs
are unable to describe this.
Another important electronic eﬀect can be ob-
served in aspirin. Here, an occupied (lone pair)
n orbital of the carbonyl group overlaps with an
unoccupied antibonding π∗orbital in the ester
group. This n →π∗interaction dictates the rel-
ative arrangement of these functional groups in
the global minimum structure.213 The eﬀect is
even ampliﬁed during dynamics, since thermal
ﬂuctuations enhance the overlap.69
These and many other electronic eﬀects, e.g.
n →σ∗interactions, hyperconjugation, and
Jahn-Teller distortions are captured automati-
cally by ML-FFs. In contrast, including them in
conventional FFs would require additional terms,
whose functional form (and even which eﬀects
need to be modeled) are typically unknown a
priori.
4.2
Thermodynamics
A typical application of classical FFs is the study
of thermodynamic properties of bulk systems,
such as enthalpies, entropies, and phase dia-
grams.
However, their limited accuracy is a
major obstacle for quantitative predictions, as
small inaccuracies in the interaction of a few par-
ticles will inevitably lead to big discrepancies
when studying many particles. A good example
for this are van der Waals (vdW) interactions.
They are weak contributions to the total po-
tential energy for small molecules in gas phase,
but they add up in large condensed systems and
bulk materials and can strongly inﬂuence their
properties and dynamics.280 While conventional
FFs account for vdW interactions, they typically
do so with a relatively crude model based on the
Lennard-Jones potential,14 which is insuﬃcient
for quantitative predictions in many cases. A
prime example is water: It is the most stud-
ied liquid in literature and many diﬀerent con-
ventional FFs for water (some with additional
special-purpose terms) have been proposed in
the last decades, yet none of them is able to re-
produce all experimentally measured properties
of water in MD simulations.281
Here, ML-FFs oﬀer a promising alternative.
Morawietz et al. 259 trained a descriptor-based
NNP on periodic conﬁgurations of liquid and
crystalline water, for which reference data was
calculated with diﬀerent DFT functionals. MD
simulations with the ML-FF revealed that the
thermodynamic anomalies of water, such as its
density maximum and negative volume of melt-
ing, are due to a delicate balance of weak vdW
forces. The study was able to accurately pre-
dict experimentally measured radial distribu-
tion functions, as well as temperature depen-
dent shear viscosities and diﬀusion coeﬃcients.
As ML-FFs are naturally able to describe bond
breaking and formation, the study could even in-
vestigate proton transfer between diﬀerent water
molecules.
The ability to analyze thermodynamic prop-
erties of reactive events is a major advantage
of ML-FFs over conventional methods. For ex-
ample, a recent study investigated the Gibbs
free energy of proton transfer in liquid water at
a titanium oxide surface.260 A descriptor-based
NNP was trained using reference data collected
through an adaptive sampling approach and
used to run MD simulations. The study revealed
that a signiﬁcant fraction of water molecules
forms short-lived hydroxyl groups on the tita-
nium oxide surface, which strongly inﬂuence
its surface chemistry. Such insights are key to
understanding phenomena such as surface func-
tionalization and photocatalytic processes.
Another application where the ﬂexibility of
ML-FFs is a major advantage is the modeling
of bulk materials. For example, Gaussian ap-
proximation potentials (GAPs, see Section 2.3.3)
and NNPs have been constructed for elemental
carbon261 and silicon.262–265 They allow to inves-
tigate a wide range of phenomena of liquid, crys-
talline, and amorphous solid phases, including
defects and crack propagation. Modeling these
eﬀects accurately is only possible with ML-FFs
or prohibitively expensive AIMD simulations. It
45

is even possible to predict accurate phase dia-
grams of such systems with ML-FFs.262,263 Since
this requires a correct model of bond formation
and breaking, as well as changes of bonding pat-
terns, such insights could not be obtained from
conventional FFs.
4.3
Reactions
One of the most signiﬁcant advantages of ML-
FFs over conventional FFs is their natural abil-
ity to model chemical reactions. Even in cases
where it is possible to construct special purpose
classical FFs that are able to describe reactions,
they are typically much less accurate than their
ML-FF counterparts.
For example, a recent
study compared an ML-FF constructed with a
message-passing NNP with two classical meth-
ods to obtain a reactive FF for the Cl–CH3–Br
transformation.212 Here, the ML-FF achieved
up to three orders of magnitude lower errors and
yielded qualitatively and quantitatively diﬀerent
predictions for the Helmholtz free energy surface
along the reaction path. It is therefore no sur-
prise that one of the ﬁrst ﬁelds where ML-FFs
were employed with great success are reaction
dynamics. Here, the chemical transformations
associated with molecular collisions over short
time and length scales are studied. These simu-
lations oﬀer detailed atomistic insights into the
reaction mechanism, providing access to rate
constants and scattering cross sections, as well
as insights on how the molecular energy is dis-
tributed between diﬀerent modes, all of which
can be directly related to experiments. In or-
der to yield quantitative predictions, suﬃcient
statistics and highly accurate PESs are required,
making them an excellent application for ML-
FFs. Studies typically involve small molecular
systems, which are treated at high levels of accu-
racy, such as the collision of N+
2 and Ar266,267 or
the Cl+CH3OH →HCl+CH3O/CH2OH reac-
tion.268 Typical conventional FFs require ﬁxed
bonding patterns and are thus intrinsically un-
suited for studying chemical reactions. While
there also exist reactive variants of classical FFs,
they do not reach the accuracy of ML-FFs. For
example, a recent study investigated the thermal
activation of methane by MgO+ with a message-
passing NNP (see Section 2.3.4) and a reactive
classical FF.269 Here, the ML-FF achieved pre-
diction errors up to two orders of magnitude
lower than the classical variant compared to
ab initio data. In addition, the disagreement
between experimental rate constants and those
predicted from MD simulations was lower by
a factor of two with the ML-FF compared to
the values obtained from the classical FF. The
remaining discrepancy between prediction and
experiment was further investigated and it was
determined that the deviation was not due to
inaccuracies of the ML-FF per se, but instead
could be traced back to the multireference char-
acter of the transition state, i.e. problems with
the ab initio reference data itself.
Even though it is possible to construct clas-
sical reactive FFs for speciﬁc reactions, there
are cases where this is exceedingly diﬃcult. A
good example is a recent study where the photo-
tautomerization reaction of acetaldehyde was
investigated, which is speculated to be a ma-
jor pathway for formic acid formation in the
atmosphere.270 After being photo-excited, ac-
etaldehyde contains enough energy that it may
not only tautomerize to ethenol, but also dissoci-
ate into carbon monoxide and methane, or into
hydrogen and ethenone. An accurate descrip-
tion of all three possible reaction pathways with
the same FF is extremely diﬃcult to achieve
with conventional methods. The NNP used for
the study on the other hand was trained on
MP2/aug-cc-pVTZ282,283 reference data and al-
lowed an unbiased description of all relevant
processes at ab initio quality. Analyzing a to-
tal of 12000 individual trajectories, the study
concluded that the formation of ethenol from
photo-tautomerization of acetaldehyde is un-
likely under atomospheric conditions. This in-
sight could not have been obtained by running
AIMD simulations in a reasonable time frame:
The combined simulation time of 1 µs would
amount to ten billion single point calculations
(a time step of ∆t = 0.1 fs was used due to
the large excitation energies). In contrast, less
than 500k structures were used for training the
ML-FF, i.e. the time spent for running ab ini-
tio calculations was reduced by more than ﬁve
orders of magnitude by employing an ML-FF.
46

Due to the eﬃciency of ML-FFs, scattering
simulations can now even be extended to in-
volve larger organic molecules. For example, a
study of the minimum dynamic path284 of Diels-
Alder reactions of 1,3-dibromo-1,3-butadiene
and maleic anhydride with an end-to-end NNP
has revealed that molecular rotations are a ma-
jor driving force for the formation of products,271
an eﬀect which had not been described previ-
ously in the literature for this type of reaction.
ML-FFs can even be applied to reactions be-
tween molecules and surfaces. For example, a
study by Liu et al. 272 investigated (reactive) HCl
scattering on a gold surface using a descriptor-
based NNP.
For a recent review on neural network-based
PESs for small molecules and reactions, see Ref.
285.
4.4
Nuclear Quantum Eﬀects
Predictive simulations of molecular systems and
materials require not only highly accurate repre-
sentations of the potential energy surface (PES),
but also appropriate statistical sampling of the
PES. While classical MD simulations are suﬃ-
cient for this in some cases, the quantum na-
ture of nuclei plays an important role in many
systems.
Nuclear quantum ﬂuctuations are
a fundamental phenomenon in nature result-
ing from Heisenberg’s uncertainty principle,290
hence physical and chemical properties of molec-
ular or biological systems, as well as nano- and
bulk-materials, may be aﬀected by them up to
certain extent.
In particular, light elements,
such as protons and atoms in the ﬁrst row of
the periodic table, are prone to display nuclear
quantum eﬀects (NQEs) even at room temper-
ature.
Furthermore, materials or molecules
formed by heavier atoms, but having strong
bonds or being at low temperatures, exhibit
signiﬁcant NQEs.291–298
Consequently, in order to generate predictive
simulations of many physical properties, NQEs
must be incorporated. A widely used methodol-
ogy to perform quantum dynamics is path inte-
gral molecular dynamics (PIMD). This method
is based on the isomorphism between a quantum
particle and a classical harmonic ring polymer
of P beads (i.e. P harmonically-coupled copies
of the particle), where the equality holds for
P →∞(see Fig. 19A).82 In practice, conver-
gence of thermodynamical properties can be
achieved using only a small number of beads.
For light atoms at room temperature for exam-
ple, P ∼16–32 is often suﬃcient to converge
mechanical properties.164,286,288,296 This number
can be reduced even further by using more so-
phisticated thermodynamic estimators.299
Given that PIMD simulations require energies
and forces for P copies of the system of interest,
it is infeasible to use ab initio methods to derive
them in most cases. There are some exceptions:
For example, PIMD simulations to study the
IR spectrum of the porphycen molecule have
been performed using DFT with the B3LYP
functional and it was shown that the correct
Helmholtz free energy and vibrational spectrum
can only be recovered by considering NQEs (see
Fig. 19B:3).288 Another example are PIMD sim-
ulations of the Zundel model at the CCSD level
of theory to study the impact of NQEs on its
structure and the 1H magnetic shielding ten-
sor.286 However, both of these studies required
supercomputers to make the calculations possi-
ble in a reasonable time frame. On the other
hand, ML-FFs can replicate the same results at
a fraction of the computational cost, i.e. speed-
ups by a factor of 105–107 (depending on the
reference level of theory) can be achieved.69,109
This gain in computational eﬃciency makes it
possible to run PIMD simulations for a wide
range of systems and oﬀers the chance to reveal
new chemical and physical insights.
For example, Chmiela et al. 105 performed
room temperature PIMD simulations of aspirin
using a GDML model (see Section 3.7.1) trained
on PBE+TS166,167 reference data to investigate
the paths followed between diﬀerent minima on
its PES. In a followup study, Chmiela et al. 69
compared free energies and vibrational density
of states of a variety of medium-sized molecules
obtained from PIMD simulations with a model
trained on CCSD or CCSD(T) reference data
to the same quantities obtained from a model
trained on PBE+TS/DFT data. The authors
found that even though the PESs at the two
diﬀerent levels of theory are very similar, tiny
47

Figure 19: A) Schematic description of the path integral (ring polymer) molecular dynamics (PIMD)
method, where quantum particles are approximated by a classical ring polymer with P beads.
There is an exact isomorphism between these two systems when P →∞, i.e. their statistical
properties become equivalent. B) PIMD simulations using DFT or coupled cluster calculations. 1:
Coupled cluster PIMD simulations of the Zundel model to compute 1H magnetic shielding tensor
(adapted with permission from Ref. 286. Copyright 2015 published by the PCCP Owner Societies
under CC BY-NC 3.0 https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc/3.0/.). 2: Example of
hydrogen-bond networks and their NQE implications on biological functions and enzyme catalysis
(adapted with permission from Ref. 2017. Copyright 2017 American Chemical Society.). 3: IR
spectrum of the porphycen molecule computed from PIMD simulations (adapted with permission
from Ref. 288. Copyright 2019 American Chemical Society.). C) PIMD simulations using ML-
FFs trained on DFT or coupled cluster data. 1: Ultra-low temperature dynamics of the Zundel
model obtained from PIMD simulations (adapted with permission from Ref. 289. Copyright 2018
American Chemical Society.). 2: Comparison of the statistical sampling of diﬀerent conformers of
ethanol between experiment and simulations (adapted with permission from Ref. 69. Copyright
2018 Chmiela et al.). 3: Schematic description of the enhancement in intra- and inter-molecular
interactions due to NQEs (adapted with permission from Ref. 160. Copyright 2020 Sauceda et al.).
48

diﬀerences may still lead to largely diﬀerent free
energies. Additionally, it was shown that the
experimentally determined populations for dif-
ferent conformations of ethanol can only be re-
covered from simulations when including NQEs
(see Fig. 19C:2).
In another study, Sch¨utt et al. 273 investigated
the dynamics of C20 fullerene using a NNP
trained on PBE+TS/DFT reference data. Here,
including NQEs broadens the radial distribu-
tion function signiﬁcantly, which also increases
the molecular polarizability.160 A change in the
distribution of interatomic distances also inﬂu-
ences electronic eﬀects: A recent study of Ref. 70
(mentioned earlier in the paragraph on electronic
eﬀects) investigated NQEs in small organic
molecules.160 The study revealed that NQEs
can dynamically strengthen molecular interac-
tions by enhancing n →π∗donation through
increasing orbital overlap, or by strengthening
electrostatic interactions between neighboring
charge densities (see Fig. 19C:3). Another in-
teresting observed eﬀect is a temporary change
of bond orders, which can lead to emerging lo-
calized transient states of methyl rotors. The
study also showed that vdW interactions are
strengthened by NQEs: Since interatomic dis-
tances expand on average due to thermal and
quantum dilations, the molecular polarizability
is also increased (see Fig. 19C:3). Other ob-
served implications of NQEs include “bonding”
between hydroxyl groups and hindered rotor dy-
namics, which leads to molecular stiﬀening and
smoother Helmholtz free energy surfaces.
ML-FFs also make it possible to go far be-
yond the system size accessible with standard
electronic structure methods. In Ref. 274, a
descriptor-based NNP was used to study the in-
ﬂuence of NQEs on aqueous NaOH solutions of
diﬀerent concentrations (∼1000 atoms). It could
be shown that NQEs exert a subtle inﬂuence on
the solvation structure in the Na+ environment
and signiﬁcantly increase the proton transfer
rates and hence diﬀusion coeﬃcients of the dif-
ferent species. The accuracy of the ML-FF also
made it possible to identify error cancellation
eﬀects in the reference method, leading to arti-
ﬁcially good agreement with experiment in the
absence of NQEs.
4.5
Excited States
The Born–Oppenheimer approximation breaks
down when modeling the dynamics of molecu-
lar excited states, which are essential for under-
standing photochemical processes. An extension
to classical MD, which allows for the simulation
of such phenomena, is quantum-classical surface
hopping MD. In this approach, the excited state
dynamics of a molecule are simulated by let-
ting it evolve on a set of PESs associated with
the diﬀerent electronic states. To describe the
distribution of the molecule between the diﬀer-
ent states, the eﬀective PES governing the time
evolution changes according to stochastic crite-
ria, e.g. based on coupling terms between the
relevant states. The correct quantum statistics
are then recovered from multiple independent
simulations. These simulations are computation-
ally intensive, as they do not only require the
computation of multiple PES, but also diﬀerent
coupling terms. This is further ampliﬁed by the
need for a large number of trajectories in order
to obtain reliable statistics. As such, quantum-
classical surface hopping simulations can proﬁt
greatly from the eﬃciency and versatility of ML-
FFs.
In Ref. 275, for example, the authors used
descriptor-based NNPs to study the excited
state dynamics of the methylene imine molecule,
as well as regions close to the conical intersec-
tion between the singlet ground and excited
states. It could be shown that the NNPs are
able to recover the eﬀective PES with high ac-
curacy and allow for eﬃcient simulations to esti-
mate the state populations of the system. Here,
the coupling between the diﬀerent surfaces was
computed based on the Zhu–Nakamura approx-
imation,300 which relies on the energy diﬀer-
ences between states. More accurate quantum
mechanical descriptions of the inter-state cou-
plings rely on so-called non-adiabatic coupling
vectors (NACs), which introduce several addi-
tional challenges from an ML perspective. First,
NACs exhibit the same rotational equivariance
as molecular forces. Second, they grow rapidly
for states lying close in energy. And ﬁnally, as
a quantity computed between diﬀerent states,
they are determined only up to an arbitrary
49

phase. The latter property in particular com-
plicates the construction of ML models, as the
random nature of the phase factor needs to be
compensated during training. Early works re-
lied on a costly preprocessing of the reference
data.276 Ref. 277, however, demonstrated that
the phase problem can be overcome by introduc-
ing phase-less loss functions during the training
procedure. Using a modiﬁed end-to-end NNP
to describe the excited state dynamics of the
methylenimmonium cation, it could be shown
that using such loss terms completely eliminates
the need for a preprocessing step. In addition,
the work modeled the NACs as derivatives of a
proxy potential, thus accounting for their trans-
formation under rotations of the molecule. The
combination of these approaches not only made
it possible to obtain accurate population statis-
tics for the studied system, but could also greatly
extend the time scales accessible by the simula-
tion beyond the limits of conventional electronic
structure approaches.
For a recent review on machine learning for
electronically excited sates, see Ref. 301.
4.6
Spectroscopy
As stated at the beginning of this section, MD
simulations are an excellent tool to model the
temporal autocorrelation functions of various
quantities, which can in turn be used to predict
experimental observables, such as diﬀusion coef-
ﬁcients. These quantities need not be restricted
to properties derived from the PES, but encom-
pass other electronic properties such as dipole
moments or polarizabilities. Access to the corre-
sponding time autocorrelation functions enables
the simulation of a wide range of molecular spec-
tra, which can be directly related to experiment.
The most prominent examples are infrared and
Raman spectra derived from the autocorrelation
functions of dipole moments and polarizabilities,
respectively. Both types of vibrational spectra
are of great practical interest, since they can be
measured accurately via experiment and provide
insights into the atomic structure of molecules
and materials. However, these spectra can be
subject to a series of complex quantum mechan-
ical eﬀects, such as vibrational anharmonicities.
Hence, high level electronic structure treatments
are required in order to obtain quantitatively
accurate predictions of experimental results. Un-
fortunately, computing the required autocorrela-
tion functions based purely on electronic struc-
ture calculations quickly grows prohibitively ex-
pensive, as simulations covering suﬃcient time
scales are required in order to yield reliable spec-
tra. In addition, if the inﬂuence of temperature
or other phenomena should be studied in detail,
a large number of such simulations is required.
Recently, ML-FFs have emerged as invaluable
tools for obtaining reliable molecular spectra. A
growing number of ML-FFs now provide access
to quantities beyond the PES, e.g. dipole mo-
ments or polarizabilities. As such, they oﬀer the
possibility to perform these simulations in only
a fraction of the time required by an ab initio
approach or even make them possible at all.
Ref. 71 demonstrates the potential inherent
to ML-FFs based on the prediction of infrared
spectra for organic molecules including the pro-
tonated alanine tripeptide.
By combining a
descriptor-based NNP model of the PES with
a dipole moment model based on latent NN-
predicted atomic charges, highly accurate in-
frared spectra could be obtained for all studied
systems. The eﬃciency of such an approach
was demonstrated based on an alkane contain-
ing more than 200 atoms, where it was possible
to reduce a projected computation time of 9000
years with the original ab initio method to only
a few days (including the reference calculations
needed for training the ML models). Moreover,
the high accuracy of the predictions made it
possible to identify shortcomings of the original
reference methods and study how they inﬂuence
the infrared spectrum of the tripepdtide. A sim-
ilar latent charge based approach was employed
in Ref. 194 to model infrared spectra of various
amino acids. This study could not only obtain
accurate spectra, but also demonstrated that
the latent charges predicted by the dipole model
constitute a valid ML driven scheme for deriv-
ing atomic partial charges, which can be used
to model long-range electrostatic interactions
explicitly. This scheme has since been employed
in many physically augmented models (e.g. Ten-
sorMol194 or PhysNet108).
50

In a similar manner, ML models capable of
predicting polarizability tensors oﬀer access to
Raman spectra. Ref. 278 introduces a symme-
try adapted approach for modeling polarizabil-
ity tensors using Gaussian process regression
(GPR) based on the SOAP117 kernel. The au-
thors use this model to study the Raman spectra
of paracetamol in gas phase and various molec-
ular crystals and achieve excellent agreement
with electronic structure methods in both cases.
Not only is the proposed approach highly data
eﬃcient, requiring only a small number (<1000)
of reference data, but it could also be shown
that the resulting model is transferable between
diﬀerent polymorphic forms of the crystal. Ref.
279 models Raman spectra of liquid water us-
ing descriptor-based NNPs to predict molecular
polarizabilities. The computational eﬃciency
of the approach made it possible to obtain Ra-
man spectra for a system containing 416 water
molecules based on two nanosecond trajectories
at DFT level accuracy, a feat which would be
infeasible with the original reference method.
As a consequence, the inﬂuence of temperature
eﬀects on the Raman spectra of water and heavy
water could be studied in detail. The atomic
resolution of the employed ML approach made
it possible to decompose the simulated spectra
into intramolecular and intermolecular contri-
butions, oﬀering insights into the mechanisms
governing the temperature dependence of the
diﬀerent spectral features.
5
Challenges
Following the best practices outlined in the pre-
vious section, the current generation of ML-FFs
is applicable to a wide range of problems in chem-
istry that involve small- to medium-sized sys-
tems. While this space of chemical compounds
is already signiﬁcant in size, the “dream scenario”
of chemists and biologists referenced in the in-
troduction can only be realized with access to
larger system sizes. Not only does the number
of stable structures increase exponentially with
added atomistic degrees of freedom,302,303 many
interesting phenomena play out at nanoscale
resolution, which is inaccessible to ML methods
as of yet. This is because some steps involved
in the construction of ML-FFs, like sampling
the reference data, which are solvable at small
scale, become seemingly insurmountable obsta-
cles at larger scales due to unfeasible computing
times. The complexity of interactions, e.g. the
non-classical behavior of nuclei, as well as sig-
niﬁcant contributions from large ﬂuctuations,
increase the space of conformations that need
to be learned. To further complicate things, the
cost of accurate ab initio calculations increases
steeply with expanding system size, limiting the
amount of reference data that can be collected
within a reasonable time frame. This also means
that a growing number of atom correlations need
to be represented by a model in order to capture
the full scope of interactions present in the real
system. Below, some considerations in recon-
ciling the somewhat contradicting demands of
scalability, transferability, data eﬃciency and
accuracy in large-scale ML-FFs are outlined.
5.1
Locality and smoothness as-
sumptions
A fundamental challenge that must be faced by
ab initio methods, conventional FFs, and ML
models alike is the many-body problem. Most
properties of a physical system are determined
by the interaction of many particles, whether
those are electrons or, on a higher abstraction
level, atoms. In fact, the reason that ab initio
calculations are expensive to obtain is due to
the challenging computational scaling proper-
ties of high-dimensional many-body problems.
As a result, the hierarchy of diﬀerent levels of
theory is directly deﬁned by the level of correla-
tion treatment in the respective wave function
parametrization. Because the number of elec-
tronic degrees of freedom of a system is much
higher than the number of atoms, the computa-
tional limitations of ab initio methods become
evident very quickly, even for small systems.
Atomistic approximations scale more favorably,
because they need to correlate less particles, but
they are subject to the same scaling laws. The
only escape is to neglect some correlations in fa-
vor of a reduced problem size. Unfortunately, it
is to date impossible to reliably determine which
51

interactions can be removed with minimal im-
pact, without compromising the full many-body
solution. Thus, the ideal of a local model is in
conﬂict with the very nature of many-body sys-
tems. Although it is possible to recover some ef-
fects such as non-local charge transfer by means
of a charge equilibration scheme,304,305 a general
solution for this problem does not exist. While
not fully justiﬁed from a physics perspective,
assuming locality is still a useful inductive bias,
which can help generalization and computational
eﬃciency. It also helps when collecting reference
data, as it implies that larger systems can be
predicted using the information learned from
smaller systems. Another assumption, which
all ML-FFs discussed in this review make, is
that the PES is smooth. This is a necessary re-
quirement for most practical applications, since
a non-smooth PES implies force discontinuities,
which would lead to instabilities during MD sim-
ulations. Smoothness is also a requirement from
the ML perspective, as only regular signals can
be reconstructed from limited observations.
For most commonly used NNPs and many
kernel-based ML-FFs, locality is built into the
design explicitly through the introduction of a
cutoﬀradius. The global interactions between
atoms are modeled by accumulating individual
local atomic contributions. In this “mean-ﬁeld
approximation”, the interaction of a particle
with its surroundings is reduced to an eﬀective
one-body problem, i.e. an interaction of that par-
ticle with the average eﬀect of its neighbors. As
similar neighborhoods can be identiﬁed in diﬀer-
ent compounds across chemical space, these as-
sumptions allow to build models from reference
calculations of small molecules, which are trans-
ferable to much larger structures.306,307 However,
the lack of explicit higher-order terms comes at
the cost of potentially loosing some important
interaction eﬀects, similar to the Hartree-Fock
method and Kohn-Sham DFT in ab initio cal-
culations.
On the other hand,
some models (e.g.
(s)GDML) capture global correlations in the
sense that a single prediction is obtained for
the whole structure. Of course, this relies on
reference calculations that are accurate enough
to contain the relevant information. Global in-
teractions of large systems can not be accurately
inferred from a training set of small molecules
or molecular fragments, which is why reference
calculations for the exact target structure are
necessary. It can therefore become diﬃcult to
collect enough reference data for large structures.
In addition, even models that use no atom-wise
decomposition might still implicitly assume that
interactions are local to some degree due to their
chemical descriptor. For example, in (s)GDML
models, systems are encoded as a vector of in-
verse pair-wise distances. Therefore, structural
changes between distant atoms contribute less
strongly to changes in the overall descriptor
than proximal atoms.
While locality and smoothness are valid as-
sumptions for the majority of chemical systems,
there are pathological cases where they break
down and ML models that rely on them perform
poorly. As an example, consider cumulenes – hy-
drocarbons of the form C2+nH4 (n ≥0) with
n+1 cumulative double bonds. These molecules
have a rigid linear geometry with the two ter-
minal methylene groups forming an equilibrium
dihedral angle of 0◦(when n is even) or 90◦
(when n is odd). Rotating the dihedral angle
out of its equilibrium position results in a sharp
increase in potential energy even though the
methylene groups may be separated by several
angstroms when n is large. This is due to the en-
ergetically favorable overlap of π-orbitals along
the carbon chain (a highly non-local interaction),
which is broken when the methylene groups are
rotated against each other. Additionally, the
potential energy exhibits a sharp “cusp” at the
maximum energy (i.e. it is not smooth), be-
cause the ground state electronic conﬁguration
switches abruptly from one state to another
(strictly speaking, multi-reference calculations
would be necessary here). One-dimensional pro-
jections of the PESs predicted by ML-FFs along
the rotation of the dihedral angle reveal sev-
eral problems (Fig. 20). For example, all mod-
els predict smooth approximations by design,
which is beneﬁcial for running MD simulations,
but results in large prediction errors around
the cusp. Further, when the number of double
bonds (n + 1), i.e. the “non-locality” of relevant
interactions, is increased, the quality of predic-
52

tions decreases dramatically, until all models are
unable to reproduce the energy proﬁle.
Note that by design, NNPs relying on message-
passing are unable to resolve information about
the dihedral angle if information between hy-
drogen atoms on opposite ends of the molecule
cannot be exchanged directly (i.e. rcut is too
small) and predict constant energies in this
case.
The same is true for descriptor-based
NNPs, as ﬁngerprints of chemical environments
also only consider atoms up to a cutoﬀ(see
Eqs. 22 and 23). Any kernel method taking as
input local structural descriptors relying on cut-
oﬀradii (e.g. SOAP117 or FCHL19107) will suﬀer
from the same problems. Even when a “global”
descriptor of chemical structure such as inverse
pair-wise distances is chosen (e.g. Coulomb ma-
trix28), changes in the dihedral angle between
distant groups of atoms are not resolved suf-
ﬁciently for accurate predictions (see sGDML
model in Fig. 20). The only way to ﬁx this
problem in general is to drop the locality as-
sumption completely, for example by including
all
 N
4

possible dihedral angles in the structural
descriptor (without introducing additional fac-
tors that decrease the weight of these features
with increasing distance between atoms). How-
ever, due to the combinatorial explosion of the
number of possible dihedral angles, this would
lead to extremely large descriptors whenever
the number of atoms N is not very small. The
resulting models would be slow to evaluate and
require a lot of reference data to give robust
predictions (to prevent them from entering the
extrapolation regime). An expert choice, i.e.
including only a single relevant dihedral angle
in the descriptor, is a possible way around this
issue, but requires prior knowledge of the prob-
lem at hand and goes somewhat against ML
philosophy.
As a ﬁnal remark, it should be mentioned
that conventional FFs only include terms for
dihedral angles between directly bonded atoms,
so they are equally unable to predict the en-
ergy proﬁles of the larger cumulenes shown in
Fig. 20. As such, relying on chemical locality is
an assumption made by virtually all methods
for approximating PESs and is not speciﬁc to
just ML methods.
5.2
Transferability,
scalability
and long-range interactions
The concept of chemical locality discussed above
also plays a central role in the transferabilty and
scalability of ML models for atomistic systems.
Transferability indicates how well models can
adapt to compounds varying in their chemical
composition, while scalability indicates how ef-
ﬁciently these models scale with respect to the
size of systems modeled.
Both concepts are
closely related and inherently rooted in chemi-
cal locality. The assumption that interactions
between atoms are local implies that similar
structural motifs will give rise to comparable
interactions and hence similar contributions to
the properties of a molecule or material. In an
ML context, chemical locality allows a model
to reuse the information learned for diﬀerent
parts of a molecule for similar features in diﬀer-
ent systems. In this manner, a large atomistic
system could in principle be assembled from
smaller components like a jigsaw puzzle.306 The
former aspect is crucial in order to make mod-
els transferable, while the latter allows for the
development of architectures whose evaluation
cost scales linearly with system size.
ML-FFs exploiting chemical locality oﬀer sev-
eral advantages compared to other models. If
trained properly, they can be applied to sys-
tems of diﬀerent size and composition.
The
training procedure beneﬁts in a similar manner,
as local models can be trained on structures
containing diﬀerent numbers of atoms. More-
over, it is also possible to use only fragments
of the original system during construction of a
model. This property is very attractive in sit-
uations where accurate reference computations
for the whole system are infeasible due to sys-
tem size and/or scaling of the computational
method. Local chemical environments are also
less diverse than complete structures, potentially
reducing the need for extensive sampling and
decreasing the chances that models enter the
extrapolation regime in a production setting. In
addition, local models scale linearly with system
size, as interactions are limited to the cutoﬀ
radius and can be evaluated eﬃciently. In con-
trast, models without cutoﬀs are typically more
53

0
1
2
0
90
180
0
1
2
0
90
180 0
90
180 0
90
180
dihedral angle [°]
energy [eV]
reference
PhysNetrcut = 6 Å
PhysNetrcut = 12Å
SchNetrcut = 6 Å
SchNetrcut = 12Å
sGDML
Figure 20: Energy proﬁles of diﬀerent ML-based PESs for a rotation of the dihedral angle between
the terminal methylene groups of cumulenes (C2+nH4) of diﬀerent sizes (0 ≤n ≤7). All reference
calculations were performed with the semi-empirical MNDO method308 and models were trained on
4500 structures (with an additional 450 structures used for validation) collected from MD simulations
at 1000 K. Because rotations of the dihedral angle are not suﬃciently sampled at this temperature,
the dihedral was rotated randomly before performing the reference calculations. Instead of a sharp
cusp at the maximum of the rotation barrier, all models predict a smooth curve. Predictions become
worse for increasing cumulene sizes with the cusp region being over-smoothed more strongly. For
n = 7, all models fail to predict the angular energy dependence. Note that NNP models (such as
PhysNet and SchNet) may already fail for smaller cumulenes when the cutoﬀdistance is chosen
too small (rcut = 6 ˚A), as they are unable to encode information about the dihedral angle in the
environment-descriptor. However, it is possible to increase the cutoﬀ(rcut = 12 ˚A) to counter this
eﬀect.
54

limited in their practical applicability for ex-
tended systems. They always require reference
computations to be performed for the whole sys-
tem and, once trained, can only be reused for
this particular molecule or material.
Despite these advantages, local ML models
suﬀer from several inherent problems. In or-
der to construct models which exploit locality,
a chemical system needs to be partitioned in
one way or another. This can for example be
achieved by limiting interactions to terms involv-
ing only a certain number of atoms (similar to
conventional FFs) or by restricting them to local
atom-centered environments. These approxima-
tions place strong limitations on which kind of
interactions can be described. As a result, local
ML models have diﬃculty when dealing with
the situations where non-local eﬀects are impor-
tant, such as strongly conjugated systems and
excited states (see Section 5.1). For standard
simulations, the presence of long-range interac-
tions, such as electrostatic and dispersion eﬀects,
are much more common phenomena. These are
particularly important for modeling extended
systems, where ML models are typically believed
to oﬀer a signiﬁcant advantage over more conven-
tional FFs. Since the structure and dynamical
behavior of such systems is inﬂuenced greatly by
long-range interactions, ML models need to be
able to account for them in a satisfying manner.
Recovering long-range eﬀects necessitates a
balancing act between physical accuracy and
computational eﬃciency, as the scalability of
local models hinges on there being a limited
number of interactions which need to be eval-
uated. This feat is further complicated by the
typical energy scales of these interactions, which
are small compared to local contributions such
as bond energies. For these reasons, it is not
advisable to account for long-range interactions
by simply increasing the size of local environ-
ments. While local models with suﬃciently large
cutoﬀs are able to learn the relevant eﬀects in
principle, it may require a disproportionately
large amount of data to reach an acceptable
level of accuracy for an interaction with a com-
parably simple functional form. The reason is
that average gradients and curvature in diﬀer-
ent regions of the PES may diﬀer by several
1.0
1.2
1.4
1.6
1.8
2.0
1.0
0.5
0.0
E(r)
2.4e-03
5.3e-03
2.4e-03
(a)
1.0
1.2
1.4
1.6
1.8
2.0
1.0
0.5
0.0
E(r)
1.9e-02
6.4e-02
1.2e-02
(b)
1.0
1.2
1.4
1.6
1.8
2.0
r
1.0
0.5
0.0
E(r)
4.6e-04
1.9e-04
2.5e-04
(c)
Figure 21: Lennard-Jones potential (thick gray
line) predicted by KRR with a Gaussian kernel.
In (a), the potential energy is decomposed into
short- (red), middle- (magenta) and long-range
(blue) parts, which are learned by separate mod-
els (symbols show the training data and solid
lines the model predictions). The mean squared
prediction errors (in arbitrary units) for the re-
spective regions are shown in the corresponding
colors. In (b), the entire potential is learned by
a single model using the same training points
(green).
All models in (a) and (b) use r as
the structural descriptor.
Panel (c) shows a
single model learning the potential, but using
r−1 as structural descriptor (yellow). The mean
squared errors (a.u.) for diﬀerent parts of the
potential in (b) and (c) are reported indepen-
dently to allow direct comparison with the values
reported in (a).
orders of magnitude, which makes it diﬃcult to
achieve uniformly low prediction errors across
all regions. Hence, an optimal description would
require to employ diﬀerent characteristic scales.
For illustration, consider the following toy ex-
amples: In the ﬁrst variant, a Lennard-Jones
(LJ) potential14 is separated into a region around
its minimum, a repulsive short-range, and an
attractive long-range part. The task is to learn
each of the three regions with a separate model
(see Fig. 21a).
In the second variant, a sin-
gle model is trained on all regions at once (see
Fig. 21b). Here, all models are kernel-based
and use a Gaussian kernel (Eq. 4). The kernel
hyper-parameter γ is optimized by a grid-search
55

and cross-validation. Compared to the mod-
els trained on individual regions, the prediction
errors of the model for all regions increase by
around an order of magnitude. Further, it shows
spurious oscillations between training points in
the long-range region. When the optimal values
of γ for the diﬀerent models are compared, the
reason for failure when training on all regions at
once becomes apparent: The optimal values of
γ are 198.88, 75.47, 0.08 for the short-, middle-,
and long-range models, respectively, which high-
lights the multi-scale nature of the PES. On the
other hand, when training on all regions at once,
the model necessarily has to compromise, which
leads to an optimal value of γ = 22.12. In this
toy example, the multi-scale problem can be
solved by switching from using r as a structural
descriptor to the more appropriate inverse dis-
tance r−1 (Fig. 21c). Unfortunately, for realistic
(high-dimensional) PESs with multiple minima,
it can be diﬃcult to ﬁnd an appropriate descrip-
tor to address the multi-scale nature of the PES,
which leads to data-ineﬃcient models. As a re-
sult, more training data is needed to reach an
acceptable accuracy, which is problematic con-
sidering the computational cost of high-quality
reference calculations.
One possibility of overcoming these limita-
tions is by instead partitioning the energy into
contributions modeled entirely via ML (short-
range) and contributions described via explicit
physical relations based on local quantities pre-
dicted via ML (long-range). A prime example
for such an approach is the treatment of elec-
trostatics, as was ﬁrst introduced in Ref. 220.
Here, an ML model is used to predict partial
charges for each atom based on their local en-
vironment. These charges can then be used in
standard Coulomb and Ewald summation to
compute the long-range electrostatic energy of
a system. While such schemes initially relied
on point charge reference data obtained from
(arbitrary) partitioning methods of the ab ini-
tio electron density (e.g. Hirshfeld charges309),
they have since been extended to operate on
charges derived from an ML model for dipole
moments (a true quantum mechanical observ-
able).71,108,194 Here, scalar partial charges qi are
predicted for each atom i and the molecular
dipole moment is constructed as µ = P
i qiri,
where ri are the atomic positions (the predicted
qi can be corrected to guarantee charge conserva-
tion108). The discrepancy between reference and
predicted dipole moments is included in the loss
function used for training the model (see Sec-
tion 3.5) and the partial charges consequently
derived in a purely data-driven manner.
Contrary to electrostatics, accounting for dis-
persion interactions is not as straightforward,
because the exact physical form of dispersion
interactions is still debated and a variety of ap-
proximate schemes have been proposed.280 In
addition, dispersion corrections typically depend
on coeﬃcients computed from atomic polariz-
abilities as local properties. The corresponding
quantum mechanical observable is the molecu-
lar polarizability tensor. In contrast to charges
(scalars) derived from dipole moments (a vector
quantity), predicting molecular polarizabilities
requires rotationally equivariant ML models.310
Because of this, many ML approaches rely on
the same empirical pair-wise dispersion poten-
tials employed for correcting density functional
theory computations.108,311,312
To summarize, local ML architectures are a
promising approach towards transferable and
scalable models, but they have a number of draw-
backs which will still need to be addressed in
the future. Promising alternative approaches to
achieve transferability are ML models based di-
rectly on electronic structure methods, i.e. “semi-
empirical ML”57,313,314 and models for electron
density and Hamiltonians.55 These approaches
express fundamental quantum chemical quanti-
ties in a local representation, e.g. Hamiltonian
matrix elements in an atomic orbital basis. Non-
locality can then be introduced via the “correct”
mathematical mechanism, e.g. matrix diagonal-
ization in the case of Hamiltonians. This physi-
cally motivated structure allows such models to
recover a wide range of interactions while still be-
ing transferable. They are also better suited to
predict intensive properties of molecules (whose
magnitude is independent of system size), where
assuming additive atomic contributions is not
valid. A downside of such models compared
to conventional ML-FFs is the increased com-
putational cost due to the additional matrix
56

operations.
With respect to scalability, hybrid approaches
similar to QM/MM25 might constitute valid al-
ternatives to pure ML models. Although several
orders of magnitude more eﬃcient than elec-
tronic structure theory, even local ML models
encounter problems when faced with systems
containing tens of thousands of atoms. Com-
pared to conventional FFs, the more complex
functional form underlying ML-FFs leads to an
increased computational cost.
In such cases,
partitioning the system into regions treated at
diﬀerent levels of approximation can lead to a
signiﬁcant speedup. ML models can for example
be embedded into regions modeled by classical
force ﬁelds, yielding ML/MM like simulation pro-
tocols. Restricting elaborate ML approaches to
only a subset of a chemical systems would make
it possible to employ more accurate approxi-
mations in a manner analogous to conventional
QM/MM. For example, in Ref. 315, the authors
study protein–ligand binding with a ML/MM
approach: The ligand is described by an NN-
based ML-FF and treated as if it was in gas
phase. Coupling to the protein environment (de-
scribed by a conventional FF) is achieved solely
through non-bonded dispersion and electrostatic
interactions. The disadvantage of such a simple
embedding is that the “quantum region” cannot
be polarized by the “classical region”. A more so-
phisticated embedding was recently proposed by
Gastegger et al. 316. Here, the region described
by the ML-FF is explicitly polarized by the elec-
tric ﬁeld induced by surrounding point charges,
i.e. the electric ﬁeld is an additional input to the
model. Alternative approaches, describe the ef-
fect of the classical environment by augmenting
structural descriptors such as ACSFs by addi-
tional terms explicitly depending on the MM
point charges.317 A similar approach is followed
in Ref. 318, where the classical environment is
described by auxiliary atom types.
6
Concluding remarks
The last decades have witnessed signiﬁcant ad-
vances in statistical learning that allowed ML
techniques to enter our daily lives, industrial
practice and scientiﬁc research.
Classically, automation in industry and sci-
entiﬁc ﬁelds relied on hand-crafted rules that
represented human knowledge.319 Not only is
the creation of rule-based systems laborious and
may require to cover an excessive number of
cases, it often leads to rigid structures that are
unable to adapt well to new situations. Even
worse, some concepts are diﬃcult or impossi-
ble to formalize, such as human perception for
image classiﬁcation.
Modern statistical ML algorithms98,127 such
as deep learning94,320–322 or kernel-based learn-
ing90,92,125,323,324 enable models that freely adapt
to knowledge that is implicitly contained in
datasets (in an abstract form) and thus oﬀer
a more robust way of solving problems than
rule-based reasoning. For the ﬁeld of molecular
simulations, the potential of ML methods may
help to bridge the accuracy-eﬃciency gap be-
tween ﬁrst-principles electronic structure meth-
ods and conventional (rule-based) FFs. Bringing
both ﬁelds together has raised many questions
and still poses some fundamental challenges for
new generations of ML-FFs. At this point in
time, ML-FFs have already become a successful
and practical tool in computational chemistry.
Starting from a broad perspective, this review
has focused on the role of ML for constructing
force ﬁelds and assessed what can be achieved
with these new techniques at the current stage
of development. This has been contrasted with
problems that are (so far) beyond the reach of
present methods. Illustrative examples of the rel-
evant chemistry and ML concepts have been dis-
cussed to demonstrate the practical usefulness
that modern ML techniques can bring to chem-
istry and physics. This includes an overview
of the most important considerations behind
the construction of modern ML-FFs, such as
the incorporation of physical invariances, choice
of ML algorithms, and loss functions. Special
attention has been given to the topic of validat-
ing ML-FFs, which requires particular care in
scientiﬁc applications.325 Furthermore, a com-
prehensive list of best practices, pitfalls, and
challenges has been provided, which will serve
as a useful guideline for practitioners standing
on either side of this growing interdisciplinary
57

ﬁeld. These “tricks of the trade”156 are often
assumed to be obvious and thus omitted from
publications – here they have been deliberately
spelled out to avoid unnecessary barriers to en-
ter the ﬁeld. Additionally, a small catalog of
software tools that can enable and accelerate the
implementation of ML-FFs has been provided
as a pointer for readers wishing to adopt ML
methods in their own research.
While routinely performing computational
studies of condensed phase systems (e.g. proteins
in solution) at the highest levels of theory is still
beyond reach, ML methods have already made
other “smaller dreams” a reality: Just a decade
ago, it would have been unthinkable to study the
dynamics of molecules like aspirin at coupled
cluster accuracy. Today, a couple hundred ab
initio reference calculations are enough to con-
struct ML-FFs that reach this accuracy within a
few tens of wavenumbers.326 In the past, even if
suitable reference data was available, construct-
ing accurate force ﬁelds was labor-intensive and
required human eﬀort and expertise. Nowadays,
by virtue of automatic ML methods, the same
task is as eﬀortless as the push of a button.
Thanks to the speed-ups oﬀered by ML meth-
ods over conventional approaches, studies that
previously required supercomputers to be feasi-
ble in a realistic time frame286,288 can now be
performed on a laptop computer.69,109
In addition to enabling studies that were pro-
hibitively expensive in the past, ML methods
have also led to new chemical insights on systems
that were thought to be already well understood.
Even relatively small molecules were shown to
display non-trivial electronic eﬀects, inﬂuencing
their dynamics and allowing a better understand-
ing of experimental observations.160 Many other
unknown chemical eﬀects potentially wait to be
discovered by studies now possible with ML-FFs.
At the speed at which improvements to existing
ML-FFs are published, it is not unreasonable
to expect signiﬁcant advances that will make
similar studies possible for larger systems and
help realize many more “dreams” in the near
future.
Concluding, ML-FFs are a highly active line
of research with many unexplored avenues and
attractive applications in chemistry, with possi-
bilities to contribute to a better understanding
of fundamental quantum chemical properties
and ample opportunity for novel theoretical, al-
gorithmic and practical improvement. Given
the success of this relatively young interdisci-
plinary ﬁeld, it is to be expected that ML-FFs
will become a fundamental part of modern com-
putational chemistry.
Acknowledgement
OTU
acknowledges
funding from the Swiss National Science Foun-
dation (Grant No. P2BSP2 188147). AT was
supported by the European Research Coun-
cil (ERC-CoG “BeStMo”).
KRM was sup-
ported in part by the Institute of Information
& Communications Technology Planning &
Evaluation (IITP) grants funded by the Korea
Government (No. 2017-0-00451, Development
of BCI based Brain and Cognitive Computing
Technology for Recognizing User’s Intentions
using Deep Learning) and funded by the Ko-
rea Government (No. 2019-0-00079, Artiﬁcial
Intelligence Graduate School Program, Ko-
rea University), and was partly supported by
the German Ministry for Education and Re-
search (BMBF) under Grants 01IS14013A-E,
01GQ1115, 01GQ0850, 01IS18025A, 031L0207D
and 01IS18037A; the German Research Founda-
tion (DFG) under Grant Math+, EXC 2046/1,
Project ID 390685689. We would like to thank
Stefan Ganscha for his valuable input to the
manuscript. Correspondence to AT and KRM.
Biographies
Oliver T. Unke is an SNSF postdoctoral re-
search fellow in the Machine Learning Group
at Technische Universit¨at Berlin. He received
his Ph.D. in Chemistry from the University
of Basel in 2019. His research has focused on
developing methods for constructing accurate
potential energy surfaces and their application
in molecular dynamics simulations.
Stefan Chmiela is a senior researcher at the
Berlin Institute for the Foundations of Learning
and Data (BIFOLD). He received his Ph.D.
from Technische Universit¨at Berlin in 2019. His
research interests include Hilbert space learning
58

methods for applications in quantum chemistry,
with particular focus on data eﬃciency and
robustness.
Huziel E. Sauceda is a postdoctoral researcher
in the Machine Learning Group at Technische
Universit¨at Berlin and part of the BASLEARN
project at the same institution. He obtained his
bachelor degree in Physics at the Universidad
Aut´onoma de Sinaloa in Mexico, and his master
and Ph.D. at the Institute of Physics of the
Universidad Nacional Aut´onoma de M´exico
(UNAM) in Mexico City. Between 2016 and
2019, he was a postdoctoral researcher at the
Fritz Haber Institute of the Max Planck Society
in Berlin.
His research interests include ab
initio simulations, nuclear quantum eﬀects, and
thermodynamics of (nano)materials, as well
as development and applications of machine
learning methods to quantum chemistry and
materials science.
Michael Gastegger is a postdoctoral researcher
in the BASLEARN project of the Machine
Learning Group at Technische Universit¨at
Berlin.
He received his Ph.D. in Chemistry
from the University of Vienna in Austria in
2017. His research interests include the develop-
ment of machine learning methods for quantum
chemistry and their application in simulations.
Igor Poltavsky is a senior researcher at the Uni-
versity of Luxembourg. He received his Ph.D.
from B. Verkin Institute for Low Temperature
Physics & Engineering in 2009. His research
interests include statistical physics, imaginary-
time path integral methods, nuclear quantum
eﬀects, ab initio simulations, and machine learn-
ing.
Kristof T. Sch¨utt is a senior researcher at the
Berlin Institute for the Foundations of Learning
and Data (BIFOLD). He received his master’s
degree in computer science in 2012 and his PhD
at the machine learning group of Technische
Universit¨at Berlin in 2018.
Until September
2020, he worked at the Audatic company de-
veloping neural networks for real-time speech
enhancement.
His research interests include
interpretable neural networks, representation
learning, generative models, and machine learn-
ing applications in quantum chemistry.
Alexandre Tkatchenko is a Professor of Theo-
retical Chemical Physics at the University of
Luxembourg and Visiting Professor at Tech-
nische Universit¨at Berlin.
He obtained his
bachelor degree in Computer Science and a
Ph.D. in Physical Chemistry at the Universidad
Autonoma Metropolitana in Mexico City. Be-
tween 2008 and 2010, he was an Alexander von
Humboldt Fellow at the Fritz Haber Institute of
the Max Planck Society in Berlin. Between 2011
and 2016, he led an independent research group
at the same institute. Tkatchenko serves on edi-
torial boards of two society journals: Physical
Review Letters (APS) and Science Advances
(AAAS). He received a number of awards, in-
cluding elected Fellow of the American Physical
Society, the 2020 Dirac Medal from WATOC,
the Gerhard Ertl Young Investigator Award of
the German Physical Society, and two ﬂagship
grants from the European Research Council:
a Starting Grant in 2011 and a Consolidator
Grant in 2017. His group pushes the boundaries
of quantum mechanics, statistical mechanics,
and machine learning to develop eﬃcient meth-
ods to enable accurate modeling and obtain new
insights into complex materials.
Klaus-Robert M¨uller has been a professor of
computer science at Technische Universit¨at
Berlin since 2006; at the same time he is di-
recting rsp. co-directing the Berlin Machine
Learning Center and the Berlin Big Data Cen-
ter. He studied physics in Karlsruhe from 1984
to 1989 and obtained his Ph.D. degree in com-
puter science at Technische Universit¨at Karl-
sruhe in 1992. After completing a postdoctoral
position at GMD FIRST in Berlin, he was a
research fellow at the University of Tokyo from
1994 to 1995. In 1995, he founded the Intelli-
gent Data Analysis group at GMD-FIRST (later
Fraunhofer FIRST) and directed it until 2008.
From 1999 to 2006, he was a professor at the
University of Potsdam. He was awarded the
Olympus Prize for Pattern Recognition (1999),
the SEL Alcatel Communication Award (2006),
59

the Science Prize of Berlin by the Governing
Mayor of Berlin (2014), the Vodafone Innova-
tions Award (2017). In 2012, he was elected
member of the German National Academy of
Sciences-Leopoldina, in 2017 of the Berlin Bran-
denburg Academy of Sciences and also in 2017
external scientiﬁc member of the Max Planck So-
ciety. In 2019 and 2020 he became Highly Cited
researcher in the cross-disciplinary area. His
research interests are intelligent data analysis
and Machine Learning in the sciences (Neuro-
science (speciﬁcally Brain-Computer Interfaces),
Physics, Chemistry) and in industry.
References
(1) Feynman,
R.
P.;
Leighton,
R.
B.;
Sands, M. The Feynman Lectures On
Physics. Vol. 1; Addison-Wesley, 1963.
(2) McCammon,
J.
A.;
Gelin,
B.
R.;
Karplus, M. Dynamics Of Folded Pro-
teins. Nature 1977, 267, 585–590.
(3) Phillips, D. Biomolecular Stereodynamics;
Adenine Press: Guilderland, NY, 1981.
(4) Schulz, R.; Lindner, B.; Petridis, L.;
Smith, J. C. Scaling Of Multimillion-atom
Biological Molecular Dynamics Simula-
tion On A Petascale Supercomputer. J.
Chem. Theory Comput. 2009, 5, 2798–
2808.
(5) Shaw,
D.
E.;
Deneroﬀ,
M.
M.;
Dror,
R.
O.;
Kuskin,
J.
S.;
Lar-
son, R. H.; Salmon, J. K.; Young, C.;
Batson, B.; Bowers, K. J.; Chao, J. C.,
et al. Anton, A Special-purpose Machine
For
Molecular
Dynamics
Simulation.
Commun. ACM 2008, 51, 91–97.
(6) Freddolino, P. L.; Arkhipov, A. S.; Lar-
son, S. B.; McPherson, A.; Schulten, K.
Molecular Dynamics Simulations Of The
Complete Satellite Tobacco Mosaic Virus.
Structure 2006, 14, 437–449.
(7) Zhao, G.; Perilla, J. R.; Yufenyuy, E. L.;
Meng, X.; Chen, B.; Ning, J.; Ahn, J.;
Gronenborn,
A.
M.;
Schulten,
K.;
Aiken, C., et al. Mature HIV-1 Capsid
Structure By Cryo-electron Microscopy
And All-atom Molecular Dynamics. Na-
ture 2013, 497, 643–646.
(8) Zimmerman,
M.
I.;
Porter,
J.
R.;
Ward, M. D.; Singh, S.; Vithani, N.;
Meller,
A.;
Mallimadugula,
U.
L.;
Kuhn,
C.
E.;
Borowsky,
J.
H.;
Wiewiora, R. P.,
et al. Citizen Sci-
entists Create An Exascale Computer To
Combat COVID-19. BioRxiv 2020,
(9) Karplus, M.; McCammon, J. A. Molecular
Dynamics Simulations Of Biomolecules.
Nat. Struct. Biol 2002, 9, 646–652.
(10) Dirac, P. A. M. Quantum Mechanics Of
Many-electron Systems. Proc. R. Soc.
Lond. A 1929, 123, 714–733.
(11) Gordon, M. S.; Schmidt, M. W. The-
ory And Applications Of Computational
Chemistry: The First Forty Years. Dyk-
stra, CE 2005, 1167–1189.
(12) Gonz´alez, M. Force Fields And Molecular
Dynamics Simulations. ´Ecole th´ematique
de la Soci´et´e Fran¸caise de la Neutronique.
2011; pp 169–200.
(13) Unke, O. T.;
Koner, D.;
Patra, S.;
K¨aser, S.; Meuwly, M. High-dimensional
Potential Energy Surfaces For Molecular
Simulations: From Empiricism To Ma-
chine Learning. Mach. Learn.: Sci. Tech-
nol. 2020, 1, 13001.
(14) Lennard-Jones, J. E. On The Determina-
tion Of Molecular Fields. – II. From The
Equation Of State Of A Gas. Proc. R.
Soc. Lond. A 1924, 106, 463–477.
(15) Vitalini, F.;
Mey, A. S.;
No´e, F.;
Keller, B. G. Dynamic Properties Of
Force Fields. J. Chem. Phys. 2015, 142,
02B611 1.
(16) Halgren, T. A.; Damm, W. Polarizable
Force Fields. Curr. Opin. Struct. Biol.
2001, 11, 236–242.
60

(17) Warshel, A.; Kato, M.; Pisliakov, A. V.
Polarizable Force Fields: History, Test
Cases, And Prospects. J. Chem. Theory
Comput. 2007, 3, 2034–2045.
(18) Shi, Y.; Xia, Z.; Zhang, J.; Best, R.;
Wu, C.; Ponder, J. W.; Ren, P. Polar-
izable Atomic Multipole-based AMOEBA
Force Field For Proteins. J. Chem. The-
ory Comput. 2013, 9, 4046–4063.
(19) Lopes, P. E.; Huang, J.; Shim, J.; Luo, Y.;
Li, H.; Roux, B.; MacKerell Jr, A. D. Po-
larizable Force Field For Peptides And
Proteins Based On The Classical Drude
Oscillator. J. Chem. Theory Comput.
2013, 9, 5430–5449.
(20) Rasmussen, T. D.; Ren, P.; Ponder, J. W.;
Jensen, F. Force Field Modeling Of Con-
formational Energies: Importance Of Mul-
tipole Moments And Intramolecular Po-
larization. Int. J. Quantum Chem. 2007,
107, 1390–1395.
(21) Unke, O. T.; Devereux, M.; Meuwly, M.
Minimal Distributed Charges: Multipolar
Quality At The Cost Of Point Charge
Electrostatics. J. Chem. Phys. 2017, 147,
161712.
(22) Warshel, A.; Weiss, R. M. An Empirical
Valence Bond Approach For Comparing
Reactions In Solutions And In Enzymes.
J. Am. Chem. Soc. 1980, 102, 6218–6226.
(23) Van Duin, A. C.; Dasgupta, S.; Lorant, F.;
Goddard, W. A. ReaxFF: A Reactive
Force Field For Hydrocarbons. J. Phys.
Chem. A 2001, 105, 9396–9409.
(24) Nagy, T.; Yosa Reyes, J.; Meuwly, M.
Multisurface Adiabatic Reactive Molecu-
lar Dynamics. J. Chem. Theory Comput.
2014, 10, 1366–1375.
(25) Senn, H. M.; Thiel, W. QM/MM Methods
For Biomolecular Systems. Angew. Chem.
Int. Ed. 2009, 48, 1198–1229.
(26) Kulik, H. J.; Zhang, J.; Klinman, J. P.;
Martinez, T. J. How Large Should
The QM Region Be In QM/MM Cal-
culations?
The Case Of Catechol O-
methyltransferase. J. Phys. Chem. B
2016, 120, 11381–11394.
(27) Sch¨utt, K. T.; Chmiela, S.; von Lilien-
feld, O. A.; Tkatchenko, A.; Tsuda, K.;
M¨uller, K.-R. Machine Learning Meets
Quantum Physics; Springer, 2020.
(28) Rupp, M.; Tkatchenko, A.; M¨uller, K.-R.;
Von Lilienfeld, O. A. Fast and Accurate
Modeling of Molecular Atomization En-
ergies with Machine Learning. Phys. Rev.
Lett. 2012, 108, 058301.
(29) Montavon, G.; Rupp, M.; Gobre, V.;
Vazquez-Mayagoitia, A.;
Hansen, K.;
Tkatchenko, A.; M¨uller, K.-R.; Von Lilien-
feld, O. A. Machine Learning of Molec-
ular Electronic Properties in Chemical
Compound Space. New J. Phys. 2013,
15, 095003.
(30) Hansen, K.; Montavon, G.; Biegler, F.; Fa-
zli, S.; Rupp, M.; Scheﬄer, M.; Von Lilien-
feld, O. A.; Tkatchenko, A.; M¨uller, K.-R.
Assessment and Validation of Machine
Learning Methods for Predicting Molecu-
lar Atomization Energies. J. Chem. The-
ory Comput. 2013, 9, 3404–3419.
(31) Hansen, K.;
Biegler, F.;
Ramakrish-
nan, R.;
Pronobis, W.;
Von Lilien-
feld, O. A.; Mu¨ller, K.-R.; Tkatchenko, A.
Machine Learning Predictions Of Molec-
ular Properties:
Accurate Many-body
Potentials And Nonlocality In Chemi-
cal Space. J. Phys. Chem. Lett. 2015,
6, 2326–2331.
(32) von Lilienfeld, O. A.;
M¨uller, K.-R.;
Tkatchenko, A. Exploring Chemical Com-
pound Space With Quantum-based Ma-
chine Learning. Nat. Rev. Chem. 2020,
4, 347—-358.
(33) No´e, F.; Olsson, S.; K¨ohler, J.; Wu, H.
Boltzmann Generators: Sampling Equi-
librium States Of Many-body Systems
With Deep Learning. Science 2019, 365,
eaaw1147.
61

(34) K¨ohler, J.; Klein, L.; No´e, F. Equivari-
ant Flows: Exact Likelihood Generative
Learning For Symmetric Densities. arXiv
preprint arXiv:2006.02425 2020,
(35) Zhang, J.; Yang, Y. I.; No´e, F. Tar-
geted Adversarial Learning Optimized
Sampling. J. Phys. Chem. Lett. 2019, 10,
5791–5797.
(36) Koner, D.; Unke, O. T.; Boe, K.; Be-
mish, R. J.; Meuwly, M. Exhaustive
State-to-state Cross Sections For Reac-
tive Molecular Collisions From Impor-
tance Sampling Simulation And A Neural
Network Representation. J. Chem. Phys.
2019, 150, 211101.
(37) No´e, F.; De Fabritiis, G.; Clementi, C.
Machine Learning For Protein Folding
And Dynamics. Curr. Opin. Struc. Biol.
2020, 60, 77–84.
(38) Sønderby,
S.
K.;
Sønderby,
C.
K.;
Nielsen, H.; Winther, O. Convolutional
LSTM Networks For Subcellular Local-
ization Of Proteins. International Confer-
ence on Algorithms for Computational
Biology. 2015; pp 68–80.
(39) Almagro
Armenteros,
J.
J.;
Sønderby,
C.
K.;
Sønderby,
S.
K.;
Nielsen,
H.;
Winther,
O.
DeepLoc:
Prediction
Of
Protein
Subcellular
Localization
Using
Deep
Learning.
Bioinformatics 2017, 33, 3387–3395.
(40) Botlani, M.; Siddiqui, A.; Varma, S. Ma-
chine Learning Approaches To Evaluate
Correlation Patterns In Allosteric Signal-
ing: A Case Study Of The PDZ2 Domain.
J. Chem. Phys. 2018, 148, 241726.
(41) Boninsegna, L.; N¨uske, F.; Clementi, C.
Sparse Learning Of Stochastic Dynamical
Equations. J. Chem. Phys. 2018, 148,
241723.
(42) Senior, A. W.; Evans, R.; Jumper, J.;
Kirkpatrick, J.; Sifre, L.; Green, T.;
Qin, C.; ˇZ´ıdek, A.; Nelson, A. W.; Bridg-
land, A., et al. Improved Protein Struc-
ture Prediction Using Potentials From
Deep Learning. Nature 2020, 577, 706–
710.
(43) Scherer, M. K.; Trendelkamp-Schroer, B.;
Paul, F.; P´erez-Hern´andez, G.; Hoﬀ-
mann, M.; Plattner, N.; Wehmeyer, C.;
Prinz, J.-H.; No´e, F. PyEMMA 2: A
Software Package For Estimation, Vali-
dation, And Analysis Of Markov Models.
J. Chem. Theory Comput. 2015, 11, 5525–
5542.
(44) Mardt, A.; Pasquali, L.; Wu, H.; No´e, F.
VAMPnets For Deep Learning Of Molecu-
lar Kinetics. Nat. Comm. 2018, 9, 1–11.
(45) Wehmeyer, C.; No´e, F. Time-lagged Au-
toencoders: Deep Learning Of Slow Col-
lective Variables For Molecular Kinetics.
J. Chem. Phys. 2018, 148, 241703.
(46) Wu, H.; Mardt, A.; Pasquali, L.; Noe, F.
deep Generative Markov State Models.
Adv. Neural. Inf. Process. Syst. 2018; pp
3975–3984.
(47) Chen, W.; Sidky, H.; Ferguson, A. L. Non-
linear Discovery Of Slow Molecular Modes
Using State-free Reversible VAMPnets. J.
Chem. Phys. 2019, 150, 214114.
(48) Klus, S.; Husic, B. E.; Mollenhauer, M.;
No´e, F. Kernel Methods For Detecting
Coherent Structures In Dynamical Data.
Chaos 2019, 29, 123112.
(49) Sidky, H.; Chen, W.; Ferguson, A. L.
High-resolution Markov State Models For
The Dynamics Of Trp-cage Miniprotein
Constructed Over Slow Folding Modes
Identiﬁed By State-free Reversible VAMP-
nets. J. Phys. Chem. B 2019, 123, 7999–
8009.
(50) Chen, J.;
Chen, J.;
Pinamonti, G.;
Clementi, C. Learning Eﬀective Molec-
ular Models From Experimental Observ-
ables. J. Chem. Theory Comput. 2018,
14, 3849–3858.
62

(51) Wang, J.; Olsson, S.; Wehmeyer, C.;
P´erez, A.; Charron, N. E.; De Fabri-
tiis, G.; No´e, F.; Clementi, C. Machine
Learning Of Coarse-grained Molecular
Dynamics Force Fields. ACS Cent. Sci.
2019, 5, 755–767.
(52) N¨uske, F.; Boninsegna, L.; Clementi, C.
Coarse-graining Molecular Systems By
Spectral Matching. J. Chem. Phys. 2019,
151, 044116.
(53) Wang, J.; Chmiela, S.; M¨uller, K.-R.;
No´e, F.; Clementi, C. Ensemble Learning
Of Coarse-grained Molecular Dynamics
Force Fields With A Kernel Approach. J.
Chem. Phys. 2020, 152, 194106.
(54) No´e, F.; Tkatchenko, A.; M¨uller, K.-R.;
Clementi, C. Machine Learning For Molec-
ular Simulation. Annu. Rev. Phys. Chem.
2020, 71, 361–390.
(55) Sch¨utt,
K.;
Gastegger,
M.;
Tkatchenko, A.; M¨uller, K.-R.; Mau-
rer, R. J. Unifying Machine Learning
And
Quantum
Chemistry
With
A
Deep Neural Network For Molecular
Wavefunctions. Nat. Comm. 2019, 10,
1–10.
(56) Gastegger, M.; McSloy, A.; Luya, M.;
Sch¨utt, K.; Maurer, R. A Deep Neu-
ral Network For Molecular Wave Func-
tions In Quasi-atomic Minimal Basis Rep-
resentation. J. Chem. Phys. 2020, 153,
044123.
(57) St¨ohr,
M.;
Sandonas,
L.
M.;
Tkatchenko, A. Accurate Many-body Re-
pulsive Potentials For Density-functional
Tight-binding From Deep Tensor Neural
Networks. J. Phys. Chem. Lett. 2020,
11, 6835–6843.
(58) Snyder, J. C.; Rupp, M.; Hansen, K.;
M¨uller, K.-R.; Burke, K. Finding Den-
sity Functionals With Machine Learning.
Phys. Rev. Lett. 2012, 108, 253002.
(59) Brockherde, F.; Vogt, L.; Li, L.; Tucker-
man, M. E.; Burke, K.; M¨uller, K.-R. By-
passing The Kohn-sham Equations With
Machine Learning. Nat. Comm. 2017, 8,
1–10.
(60) Bogojeski, M.; Vogt-Maranto, L.; Tuck-
erman, M. E.; M¨uller, K.-R.; Burke, K.
Quantum Chemical Accuracy From Den-
sity Functional Approximations Via Ma-
chine Learning. Nat. Comm. 2020, 11,
1–11.
(61) Hermann, J.;
Sch¨atzle, Z.;
No´e, F.
Deep Neural Network Solution Of The
Electronic Schr¨odinger Equation. arXiv
preprint arXiv:1909.08423 2019,
(62) Carleo, G.; Troyer, M. Solving The Quan-
tum Many-body Problem With Artiﬁcial
Neural Networks. Science 2017, 355, 602–
606.
(63) Gebauer,
N.
W.;
Gastegger,
M.;
Sch¨utt, K. T. Generating Equilibrium
Molecules With Deep Neural Networks.
NeurIPS 2018 Workshop on Machine
Learning for Molecules and Materials.
2018.
(64) Gebauer, N.; Gastegger, M.; Sch¨utt, K.
Symmetry-adapted Generation Of 3d
Point Sets For The Targeted Discovery
Of Molecules. Adv. Neural. Inf. Process.
Syst. 2019; pp 7566–7578.
(65) Hoﬀmann,
M.;
No´e,
F.
Generating
Valid Euclidean Distance Matrices. arXiv
preprint arXiv:1910.03131 2019,
(66) Winter, R.; Montanari, F.; Steﬀen, A.;
Briem, H.; No´e, F.; Clevert, D.-A. Eﬃ-
cient Multi-objective Molecular Optimiza-
tion In A Continuous Latent Space. Chem.
Sci. 2019, 10, 8016–8024.
(67) Simm, G. N.; Pinsler, R.; Hern´andez-
Lobato, J. M. Reinforcement Learn-
ing For Molecular Design Guided By
Quantum
Mechanics.
arXiv
preprint
arXiv:2002.07717 2020,
63

(68) Strieth-Kalthoﬀ,
F.;
Sandfort,
F.;
Segler, M. H.; Glorius, F. Machine Learn-
ing The Ropes: Principles, Applications
And Directions In Synthetic Chemistry.
Chem. Soc. Rev. 2020, 49, 6154–6168.
(69) Chmiela, S.; Sauceda, H. E.; M¨uller, K.-
R.;
Tkatchenko,
A.
Towards
Exact
Molecular Dynamics Simulations With
Machine-learned Force Fields. Nat. Com-
mun. 2018, 9, 3887.
(70) Sauceda, H. E.; Chmiela, S.; Poltavsky, I.;
M¨uller, K.-R.; Tkatchenko, A. Molecular
Force Fields With Gradient-domain Ma-
chine Learning: Construction And Appli-
cation To Dynamics Of Small Molecules
With Coupled Cluster Forces. J. Chem.
Phys. 2019, 150, 114102.
(71) Gastegger, M.; Behler, J.; Marquetand, P.
Machine Learning Molecular Dynamics
For The Simulation Of Infrared Spectra.
Chem. Sci. 2017, 8, 6924–6935.
(72) Christensen, A. S.; Faber, F. A.; von
Lilienfeld, O. A. Operators In Quantum
Machine Learning: Response Properties
In Chemical Space. J. Chem. Phys. 2019,
150, 064105.
(73) K¨aser, S.; Unke, O.; Meuwly, M. Reactive
Dynamics And Spectroscopy Of Hydro-
gen Transfer From Neural Network-based
Reactive Potential Energy Surfaces. New
J. Phys. 2020, 22, 55002.
(74) Agnihotri, N. Computational Studies Of
Charge Transfer In Organic Solar Photo-
voltaic Cells: A Review. J. Photochem.
Photobiol. C 2014, 18, 18–31.
(75) Payne, M.; Joannopoulos, J.; Allan, D.;
Teter, M.; Vanderbilt, D. H. Molecular
Dynamics And Ab Initio Total Energy
Calculations. Phys. Rev. Lett. 1986, 56,
2656.
(76) Adcock, S. A.; McCammon, J. A. Molecu-
lar Dynamics: Survey Of Methods For
Simulating The Activity Of Proteins.
Chem. Rev. 2006, 106, 1589–1615.
(77) Paquet, E.; Viktor, H. L. Molecular Dy-
namics, Monte Carlo Simulations, And
Langevin Dynamics: A Computational
Review. Biomed Res. Int. 2015, 2015.
(78) Schr¨odinger, E. An Undulatory Theory Of
The Mechanics Of Atoms And Molecules.
Phys. Rev. 1926, 28, 1049–1070.
(79) Born, M.; Oppenheimer, R. Zur Quanten-
theorie der Molekeln. Ann. Phys. 1927,
389, 457–484.
(80) Meng, X.-Y.; Zhang, H.-X.; Mezei, M.;
Cui, M. Molecular Docking: A Powerful
Approach For Structure-based Drug Dis-
covery. Curr. Comput. Aided Drug Des.
2011, 7, 146–157.
(81) Tuckerman, M. E.; Berne, B. J.; Mar-
tyna, G. J.; Klein, M. L. Eﬃcient Molec-
ular Dynamics And Hybrid Monte Carlo
Algorithms For Path Integrals. J. Chem.
Phys. 1993, 99, 2796–2808.
(82) Chandler, D.; Wolynes, P. G. Exploit-
ing The Isomorphism Between Quantum
Theory And Classical Statistical Mechan-
ics Of Polyatomic Fluids. J. Chem. Phys.
1981, 74, 4078–4095.
(83) Habershon, S.;
Manolopoulos, D. E.;
Markland, T. E.; Miller III, T. F. Ring-
polymer Molecular Dynamics: Quantum
Eﬀects In Chemical Dynamics From Clas-
sical Trajectories In An Extended Phase
Space. Annu. Rev. Phys. Chem. 2013, 64,
387–413.
(84) Poltavsky, I.; Tkatchenko, A. Modeling
Quantum Nuclei With Perturbed Path
Integral Molecular Dynamics. Chem. Sci.
2016, 7, 1368–1372.
(85) Verlet, L. Computer “Experiments” On
Classical Fluids. I. Thermodynamical
Properties Of Lennard-jones Molecules.
Phys. Rev. 1967, 159, 98.
(86) Noether,
E.
Invarianten
Beliebiger
Diﬀerentialausdr¨ucke.
G¨ott.
Nachr.,
mathematisch-physikalische Klasse 1918,
1918, 37–44.
64

(87) Shannon, C. E. Communication In The
Presence Of Noise. Proceedings of the IRE
1949, 37, 10–21.
(88) Schaﬀer, J. What Not To Multiply With-
out Necessity. Australas. J. Philos. 2015,
93, 644–664.
(89) Geman, S.; Bienenstock, E.; Doursat, R.
Neural Networks And The Bias/Variance
Dilemma. Neural Comput. 1992, 4, 1–58.
(90) M¨uller, K.-R.; Mika, S.; R¨atsch, G.;
Tsuda, K.; Sch¨olkopf, B. An Introduction
To Kernel-based Learning Algorithms.
IEEE Trans. Neural Netw. 2001, 12, 181–
201.
(91) Sch¨olkopf, B.; Smola, A.; M¨uller, K.-R.
Kernel Principal Component Analysis. In-
ternational Conference on Artiﬁcial Neu-
ral Networks. 1997; pp 583–588.
(92) Sch¨olkopf, B.; Smola, A.; M¨uller, K.-R.
Nonlinear Component Analysis As A Ker-
nel Eigenvalue Problem. Neural Comput.
1998, 10, 1299–1319.
(93) Sch¨olkopf, B.; Mika, S.; Burges, C. J.;
Knirsch, P.; M¨uller, K.-R.; R¨atsch, G.;
Smola, A. J. Input Space Versus Feature
Space In Kernel-based Methods. IEEE
Trans. Neural Netw. 1999, 10, 1000–1017.
(94) Bishop, C. M. Neural Networks for Pat-
tern Recognition; Oxford university press,
1995.
(95) M¨uller, K.-R.; Smola, A. J.; R¨atsch, G.;
Sch¨olkopf, B.; Kohlmorgen, J.; Vapnik, V.
Predicting Time Series With Support Vec-
tor Machines. International Conference
on Artiﬁcial Neural Networks. 1997; pp
999–1004.
(96) Boser, B. E.; Guyon, I. M.; Vapnik, V. N.
A Training Algorithm For Optimal Mar-
gin Classiﬁers. Proceedings of the Fifth
Annual Workshop on Computational
Learning Theory. 1992; pp 144–152.
(97) Theodoridis, S.; Koutroumbas, K., et al.
Pattern Recognition; Elsevier, 2008.
(98) Theodoridis, S. Machine Learning:
A
Bayesian And Optimization Perspective
2nd. Ed.; Academic press, 2020.
(99) Kamath, A.; Vargas-Hern´andez, R. A.;
Krems,
R.
V.;
Carrington
Jr,
T.;
Manzhos, S. Neural Networks vs Gaus-
sian Process Regression For Representing
Potential Energy Surfaces: A Compar-
ative Study Of Fit Quality And Vibra-
tional Spectrum Accuracy. J. Chem. Phys.
2018, 148, 241702.
(100) Wolpert, D. H. The Lack Of A Priori Dis-
tinctions Between Learning Algorithms.
Neural Comput. 1996, 8, 1341–1390.
(101) Lee, J.; Bahri, Y.; Novak, R.; Schoen-
holz,
S.
S.;
Pennington,
J.;
Sohl-
Dickstein, J. Deep Neural Networks
As Gaussian Processes. arXiv preprint
arXiv:1711.00165 2017,
(102) Matthews, A. G. d. G.; Rowland, M.;
Hron, J.; Turner, R. E.; Ghahramani, Z.
Gaussian Process Behaviour In Wide
Deep Neural Networks. arXiv preprint
arXiv:1804.11271 2018,
(103) Braun,
M.
L.;
Buhmann,
J.
M.;
M¨uller, K.-R. On Relevant Dimensions In
Kernel Feature Spaces. J. Mach. Learn.
Res. 2008, 9, 1875–1908.
(104) Montavon, G.; Braun, M. L.; M¨uller, K.-
R. Kernel Analysis of Deep Networks. J.
Mach. Learn. Res. 2011, 12.
(105) Chmiela,
S.;
Tkatchenko,
A.;
Sauceda,
H.
E.;
Poltavsky,
I.;
Sch¨utt, K. T.; M¨uller, K.-R. Machine
Learning Of Accurate Energy-conserving
Molecular Force Fields. Sci. Adv. 2017,
3, e1603015.
(106) Faber,
F.
A.;
Christensen,
A.
S.;
Huang, B.; von Lilienfeld, O. A. Alchem-
ical And Structural Distribution Based
Representation For Universal Quantum
Machine Learning. J. Chem. Phys. 2018,
148, 241717.
65

(107) Christensen, A. S.; Bratholm, L. A.;
Faber, F. A.; Anatole von Lilienfeld, O.
FCHL Revisited: Faster And More Ac-
curate Quantum Machine Learning. J.
Chem. Phys. 2020, 152, 044107.
(108) Unke, O. T.; Meuwly, M. Physnet: A
Neural Network For Predicting Ener-
gies, Forces, Dipole Moments And Partial
Charges. J. Chem. Theory Comput. 2019,
15, 3678–3693.
(109) Sch¨utt,
K.;
Kindermans,
P.-J.;
Sauceda,
H.
E.;
Chmiela,
S.;
Tkatchenko, A.; M¨uller, K.-R. SchNet: A
Continuous-ﬁlter Convolutional Neural
Network For Modeling Quantum Inter-
actions. Adv. Neural. Inf. Process. Syst.
2017; pp 991–1001.
(110) Klicpera, J.; Groß, J.; G¨unnemann, S.
Directional Message Passing For Molecu-
lar Graphs. International Conference on
Learning Representations (ICLR). 2020.
(111) Zhang, Y.; Hu, C.; Jiang, B. Embedded
Atom Neural Network Potentials: Eﬃ-
cient And Accurate Machine Learning
With A Physically Inspired Representa-
tion. J. Phys. Chem. Lett. 2019, 10, 4962–
4967.
(112) Zhang, L.; Han, J.; Wang, H.; Car, R.;
Weinan, E. Deep Potential Molecular Dy-
namics:
A Scalable Model With The
Accuracy Of Quantum Mechanics. Phys.
Rev. Lett. 2018, 120, 143001.
(113) Zhang, L.; Han, J.; Wang, H.; Saidi, W.;
Car, R.; Weinan, E. End-to-end Sym-
metry Preserving Inter-atomic Potential
Energy Model For Finite And Extended
Systems. Adv. Neural. Inf. Process. Syst.
2018; pp 4436–4446.
(114) Behler, J.; Parrinello, M. Generalized
Neural-Network Representation of High-
Dimensional Potential-Energy Surfaces.
Phys. Rev. Lett. 2007, 98, 146401.
(115) Lubbers, N.; Smith, J. S.; Barros, K. Hier-
archical Modeling Of Molecular Energies
Using A Deep Neural Network. J. Chem.
Phys. 2018, 148, 241715.
(116) Behler, J. Atom-Centered Symmetry
Functions
for
Constructing
High-
Dimensional Neural Network Potentials.
J. Chem. Phys. 2011, 134, 074106.
(117) Bart´ok, A. P.; Kondor, R.; Cs´anyi, G.
On Representing Chemical Environments.
Phys. Rev. B 2013, 87, 184115.
(118) Sch¨utt, K.; Glawe, H.; Brockherde, F.;
Sanna, A.; M¨uller, K.; Gross, E. How To
Represent Crystal Structures For Machine
Learning: Towards Fast Prediction Of
Electronic Properties. Phys. Rev. B 2014,
89, 205118.
(119) Faber, F.;
Lindmaa, A.;
von Lilien-
feld, O. A.; Armiento, R. Crystal Struc-
ture Representations For Machine Learn-
ing Models Of Formation Energies. Int. J.
Quantum Chem. 2015, 115, 1094–1101.
(120) Faber, F. A.; Lindmaa, A.; Von Lilien-
feld, O. A.; Armiento, R. Machine Learn-
ing Energies of 2 Million Elpasolite
(ABC$ 2$D$ 6$) Crystals. Phys. Rev.
Lett. 2016, 117, 135502.
(121) Wahba, G. Spline Models For Observa-
tional Data; Siam, 1990; Vol. 59.
(122) Sch¨olkopf, B.; Herbrich, R.; Smola, A. J.
A Generalized Representer Theorem. In-
ternational Conference on Computational
Learning Theory. 2001; pp 416–426.
(123) Argyriou, A.; Micchelli, C. A.; Pontil, M.
When Is There A Representer Theorem?
Vector Versus Matrix Regularizers. J.
Mach. Learn. Res. 2009, 10, 2507–2529.
(124) Berlinet, A.; Thomas-Agnan, C. Repro-
ducing Kernel Hilbert Spaces in Proba-
bility and Statistics; Springer Science &
Business Media Dordrecht, 2011.
(125) Sch¨olkopf, B.; Smola, A. J. Learning With
Kernels: Support Vector Machines, Reg-
ularization, Optimization, And Beyond;
MIT press, 2002.
66

(126) Rasmussen, C. E. Summer School on Ma-
chine Learning; 2003; pp 63–71.
(127) Murphy, K. P. Machine Learning: A Prob-
abilistic Perspective; MIT press, 2012.
(128) Smola, A. J.; Sch¨olkopf, B.; M¨uller, K.-R.
The Connection Between Regularization
Operators And Support Vector Kernels.
Neural Netw. 1998, 11, 637–649.
(129) Micchelli, C. A.; Xu, Y.; Zhang, H.
Universal Kernels. J. Mach. Learn. Res.
2006, 7, 2651–2667.
(130) Huang, B.; Von Lilienfeld, O. A. Commu-
nication: Understanding Molecular Rep-
resentations In Machine Learning: The
Role Of Uniqueness And Target Similar-
ity. J. Chem. Phys. 2016, 145, 161102.
(131) Hofmann, T.; Sch¨olkopf, B.; Smola, A. J.
Kernel Methods In Machine Learning.
Ann. Stat. 2008, 1171–1220.
(132) Golub, G. H.; Van Loan, C. F. Ma-
trix Computations; JHU Press Baltimore,
2012; Vol. 3.
(133) Raykar, V. C.; Duraiswami, R. Fast Large
Scale Gaussian Process Regression Us-
ing Approximate Matrix-vector Products.
Learning workshop. 2007.
(134) Williams, C. K.; Seeger, M. Using The
Nystr¨om Method To Speed Up Kernel
Machines. Adv. Neural. Inf. Process. Syst.
2001; pp 682–688.
(135) Qui˜nonero-Candela, J.; Rasmussen, C. E.
A Unifying View Of Sparse Approximate
Gaussian Process Regression. J. Mach.
Learn. Res. 2005, 6, 1939–1959.
(136) Snelson, E.; Ghahramani, Z. Sparse Gaus-
sian Processes Using Pseudo-inputs. Adv.
Neural. Inf. Process. Syst. 2006; pp 1257–
1264.
(137) Rahimi, A.; Recht, B. Random Features
For Large-scale Kernel Machines. Adv.
Neural. Inf. Process. Syst. 2008; pp 1177–
1184.
(138) Rudi, A.; Carratino, L.; Rosasco, L.
Falkon: An Optimal Large Scale Kernel
Method. Adv. Neural. Inf. Process. Syst.
2017; pp 3888–3898.
(139) Moore, E. H. On The Reciprocal Of
The General Algebraic Matrix. Bull. Am.
Math. Soc. 1920, 26, 394–395.
(140) Penrose, R. A Generalized Inverse For
Matrices. Math. Proc. Cambridge. 1955;
pp 406–413.
(141) Cutajar, K.;
Osborne, M.;
Cunning-
ham, J.; Filippone, M. Preconditioning
Kernel Matrices. International Confer-
ence on Machine Learning. 2016; pp 2529–
2538.
(142) Tikhonov, A. N.; Arsenin, V. I.; John, F.
Solutions of Ill-Posed Problems; Winston
Washington, DC, 1977; Vol. 14.
(143) McCulloch, W. S.; Pitts, W. A Logical
Calculus of the Ideas Immanent in Ner-
vous Activity. Bull. Math. Biophys. 1943,
5, 115–133.
(144) Kohonen, T. An Introduction to Neural
Computing. Neural Netw. 1988, 1, 3–16.
(145) Abdi, H. A Neural Network Primer. J.
Biol. Syst. 1994, 2, 247–281.
(146) Clark, J. W. Scientiﬁc Applications of
Neural Nets; Springer, 1999; pp 1–96.
(147) Ripley, B. D. Pattern Recognition and
Neural Networks; Cambridge university
press, 2007.
(148) Haykin, S. S. Neural Networks and Learn-
ing Machines; Pearson Upper Saddle
River, NJ, USA:, 2009; Vol. 3.
(149) LeCun, Y. A.; Bottou, L.; Orr, G. B.;
M¨uller, K.-R. Neural networks: Tricks of
the trade; Springer LNCS 7700, 2012; pp
9–48.
(150) Cybenko, G. Approximation By Super-
position Of Sigmoidal Functions. Math.
Control Signals Syst. 1989, 2, 303–314.
67

(151) Hornik, K. Approximation Capabilities of
Multilayer Feedforward Networks. Neural
Netw. 1991, 4, 251–257.
(152) Eldan, R.; Shamir, O. The Power of
Depth for Feedforward Neural Networks.
Conference on Learning Theory. 2016; pp
907–940.
(153) Cohen, N.; Sharir, O.; Shashua, A. On
The Expressive Power Of Deep Learning:
A Tensor Analysis. Conference On Learn-
ing Theory. 2016; pp 698–728.
(154) Telgarsky, M. Beneﬁts Of Depth In Neu-
ral Networks. Conference On Learning
Theory. 2016; pp 1517–1539.
(155) Lu, Z.; Pu, H.; Wang, F.; Hu, Z.; Wang, L.
The Expressive Power Of Neural Net-
works: A View From The Width. Adv.
Neural. Inf. Process. Syst. 2017, 30, 6231–
6239.
(156) Montavon, G.; Orr, G.; M¨uller, K.-R.
Neural Networks: Tricks Of The Trade;
Springer LNCS 7700, 2012; Vol. 2.
(157) Snoek, J.; Larochelle, H.; Adams, R. P.
Practical Bayesian Optimization Of Ma-
chine Learning Algorithms. Adv. Neural.
Inf. Process. Syst. 2012, 25, 2951–2959.
(158) Hastie, T.; Tibshirani, R.; Friedman, J.
The Elements Of Statistical Learning:
Data Mining, Inference, And Prediction;
Springer Science & Business Media, 2009.
(159) Sch¨utt,
K.
T.;
Arbabzadah,
F.;
Chmiela,
S.;
M¨uller,
K.
R.;
Tkatchenko,
A.
Quantum-Chemical
Insights
from
Deep
Tensor
Neural
Networks.
Nat.
Commun.
2017,
8,
13890.
(160) Sauceda, H. E.; Vassilev-Galindo, V.;
Chmiela,
S.;
M¨uller,
K.-R.;
Tkatchenko, A. Dynamical Strengthening
Of Covalent And Non-covalent Molecular
Interactions By Nuclear Quantum Eﬀects
At Finite Temperature. arXiv preprint
arXiv:2006.10578 2020,
(161) Anselmi, F.; Rosasco, L.; Poggio, T. On
Invariance And Selectivity In Representa-
tion Learning. Information and Inference:
A Journal of the IMA 2016, 5, 134–158.
(162) Hellman, H. Einf¨uhrung In Die Quan-
tenchemie; Leipzig: F. Deuticke, 1937;
Vol. 0.
(163) Feynman, R. P. Forces In Molecules. Phys.
Rev. 1939, 56, 340.
(164) Chmiela, S.; Sauceda, H. E.; Poltavsky, I.;
M¨uller, K.-R.; Tkatchenko, A. sGDML:
COnstructing Accurate And Data Eﬃ-
cient Molecular Force Fields Using Ma-
chine Learning. Comput. Phys. Commun.
2019, 240, 38–45.
(165) Adamo, C.; Barone, V. Toward Reliable
Density Functional Methods Without Ad-
justable Parameters: The PBE0 Model.
J. Chem. Phys. 1999, 110, 6158–6170.
(166) Perdew,
J.
P.;
Burke,
K.;
Ernzer-
hof, M. Generalized Gradient Approxima-
tion Made Simple. Phys. Rev. Lett. 1996,
77, 3865–3868.
(167) Tkatchenko, A.; Scheﬄer, M. Accurate
Molecular Van Der Waals Interactions
From Ground-state Electron Density And
Free-atom Reference Data. Phys. Rev.
Lett. 2009, 102, 073005.
(168) Montavon, G.; Hansen, K.; Fazli, S.;
Rupp,
M.;
Biegler,
F.;
Ziehe,
A.;
Tkatchenko,
A.;
Lilienfeld,
A.
V.;
M¨uller, K.-R. Learning Invariant Repre-
sentations Of Molecules For Atomization
Energy Prediction. Adv. Neural. Inf. Pro-
cess. Syst. 2012; pp 440–448.
(169) Huo, H.;
Rupp, M. Uniﬁed Repre-
sentation Of Molecules And Crystals
For Machine Learning. arXiv preprint
arXiv:1704.06439 2017,
(170) Hirn, M.; Mallat, S.; Poilvert, N. Wavelet
Scattering Regression Of Quantum Chem-
ical Energies. Multiscale Modeling & Sim-
ulation 2017, 15, 827–863.
68

(171) Eickenberg, M.; Exarchakis, G.; Hirn, M.;
Mallat, S. Solid Harmonic Wavelet Scat-
tering: Predicting Quantum Molecular
Energy From Invariant Descriptors Of
3d Electronic Densities. Adv. Neural. Inf.
Process. Syst. 2017; pp 6540–6549.
(172) Kriege, N. M.; Giscard, P.-L.; Wilson, R.
On Valid Optimal Assignment Kernels
And Applications To Graph Classiﬁcation.
Adv. Neural. Inf. Process. Syst. 2016; pp
1623–1631.
(173) Vert, J. The Optimal Assignment Kernel
Is Not Positive Deﬁnite. arXiv preprint
arXiv:0801.4061 2008, abs/0801.4061.
(174) Pachauri, D.; Kondor, R.; Singh, V. Adv.
Neural. Inf. Process. Syst.; 2013; pp 1860–
1868.
(175) Bart´ok, A. P.; Cs´anyi, G. Gaussian Ap-
proximation Potentials: A Brief Tuto-
rial Introduction. Int. J. Quantum Chem.
2015, 115, 1051–1057.
(176) De, S.; Bart´ok, A. P.; Cs´anyi, G.; Ceri-
otti, M. Comparing Molecules And Solids
Across Structural And Alchemical Space.
Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys. 2016, 18,
13754–13769.
(177) Umeyama, S. An Eigendecomposition Ap-
proach To Weighted Graph Matching
Problems. IEEE Trans. Pattern Anal.
Mach. Intell. 1988, 10, 695–703.
(178) Bart´ok, A. P.; Payne, M. C.; Kondor, R.;
Cs´anyi, G. Gaussian Approximation Po-
tentials: The Accuracy Of Quantum Me-
chanics, Without The Electrons. Phys.
Rev. Lett. 2010, 104, 136403.
(179) Bart´ok, A. P.; De, S.; Poelking, C.; Bern-
stein, N.; Kermode, J. R.; Cs´anyi, G.; Ce-
riotti, M. Machine Learning Uniﬁes The
Modeling Of Materials And Molecules.
Sci. Adv. 2017, 3, e1701816.
(180) Grisaﬁ, A.; Wilkins, D. M.; Cs´anyi, G.;
Ceriotti, M. Symmetry-adapted Machine
Learning For Tensorial Properties Of
Atomistic Systems. Phys. Rev. Lett. 2018,
120, 036002.
(181) Cs´anyi,
G.;
Willatt,
M.
J.;
Ceri-
otti, M. Machine Learning Meets Quan-
tum Physics; Springer, 2020; pp 99–127.
(182) Blank, T. B.;
Brown, S. D.;
Cal-
houn, A. W.; Doren, D. J. Neural Network
Models Of Potential Energy Surfaces. J.
Chem. Phys. 1995, 103, 4129–4137.
(183) Brown, D. F.; Gibbs, M. N.; Clary, D. C.
Combining Ab Initio Computations, Neu-
ral Networks, And Diﬀusion Monte Carlo:
An Eﬃcient Method To Treat Weakly
Bound Molecules. J. Chem. Phys. 1996,
105, 7597–7604.
(184) Tafeit, E.; Estelberger, W.; Horejsi, R.;
Moeller, R.; Oettl, K.; Vrecko, K.; Reib-
negger, G. Neural Networks As A Tool
For Compact Representation Of ab Initio
Molecular Potential Energy Surfaces. J.
Mol. Graph. 1996, 14, 12–18.
(185) No, K. T.; Chang, B. H.; Kim, S. Y.;
Jhon, M. S.; Scheraga, H. A. Description
Of The Potential Energy Surface Of The
Water Dimer With An Artiﬁcial Neural
Network. Chem. Phys. Lett. 1997, 271,
152–156.
(186) Prudente, F. V.; Neto, J. S. The Fit-
ting Of Potential Energy Surfaces Us-
ing Neural Networks. Application To The
Study Of The Photodissociation Pro-
cesses. Chem. Phys. Lett. 1998, 287, 585–
589.
(187) Manzhos,
S.;
Carrington
Jr,
T.
A
Random-Sampling
High
Dimensional
Model Representation Neural Network
for Building Potential Energy Surfaces.
J. Chem. Phys. 2006, 125, 084109.
(188) Manzhos, S.; Carrington Jr, T. Using
Redundant Coordinates to Represent
Potential Energy Surfaces with Lower-
Dimensional Functions. J. Chem. Phys.
2007, 127, 014103.
69

(189) Malshe, M.; Narulkar, R.; Raﬀ, L.; Ha-
gan, M.; Bukkapatnam, S.; Agrawal, P.;
Komanduri, R. Development of Gen-
eralized Potential-Energy Surfaces us-
ing Many-Body Expansions, Neural Net-
works, and Moiety Energy Approxima-
tions. J. Chem. Phys. 2009, 130, 184102.
(190) Khorshidi, A.; Peterson, A. A. Amp: A
Modular Approach To Machine Learning
In Atomistic Simulations. Comput. Phys.
Commun. 2016, 207, 310–324.
(191) Artrith, N.; Urban, A.; Ceder, G. Eﬃcient
And Accurate Machine-learning Interpola-
tion Of Atomic Energies In Compositions
With Many Species. Phys. Rev. B 2017,
96, 014112.
(192) Unke, O. T.; Meuwly, M. A Reactive, Scal-
able, And Transferable Model For Molec-
ular Energies From A Neural Network
Approach Based On Local Information. J.
Chem. Phys. 2018, 148, 241708.
(193) Smith, J. S.; Isayev, O.; Roitberg, A. E.
ANI-1: An Extensible Neural Network
Potential With DFT Accuracy At Force
Field Computational Cost. Chem. Sci.
2017, 8, 3192–3203.
(194) Yao, K.; Herr, J. E.; Toth, D. W.; Mck-
intyre, R.; Parkhill, J. The TensorMol-
0.1 Model Chemistry: A Neural Network
Augmented With Long-range Physics.
Chem. Sci. 2018, 9, 2261–2269.
(195) Duvenaud, D. K.; Maclaurin, D.; Ipar-
raguirre, J.; Bombarell, R.; Hirzel, T.;
Aspuru-Guzik, A.; Adams, R. P. Convolu-
tional Networks On Graphs For Learning
Molecular Fingerprints. Adv. Neural. Inf.
Process. Syst. 2015; pp 2224–2232.
(196) Kearnes, S.; McCloskey, K.; Berndl, M.;
Pande, V.; Riley, P. Molecular Graph Con-
volutions: Moving Beyond Fingerprints.
J. Comput. Aided Mol. Des. 2016, 30,
595–608.
(197) Gilmer, J.; Schoenholz, S. S.; Riley, P. F.;
Vinyals, O.; Dahl, G. E. Neural Message
Passing for Quantum Chemistry. Interna-
tional Conference on Machine Learning.
2017; pp 1263–1272.
(198) Scarselli, F.; Gori, M.; Tsoi, A. C.; Hagen-
buchner, M.; Monfardini, G. The Graph
Neural Network Model. IEEE Trans. Neu-
ral Netw. 2008, 20, 61–80.
(199) Sch¨utt,
K.
T.;
Gastegger,
M.;
Tkatchenko, A.; M¨uller, K.-R. Quantum-
chemical Insights From Interpretable
Atomistic
Neural
Networks.
arXiv
preprint arXiv:1806.10349 2018,
(200) Hy, T. S.; Trivedi, S.; Pan, H.; Ander-
son, B. M.; Kondor, R. Predicting Molec-
ular Properties With Covariant Compo-
sitional Networks. J. Chem. Phys. 2018,
148, 241745.
(201) Anderson, B.; Hy, T. S.; Kondor, R. Cor-
morant: Covariant Molecular Neural Net-
works. Adv. Neural. Inf. Process. Syst.
2019; pp 14537–14546.
(202) Weiler, M.; Geiger, M.; Welling, M.;
Boomsma, W.; Cohen, T. S. 3d Steer-
able CNNs: Learning Rotationally Equiv-
ariant Features In Volumetric Data. Adv.
Neural. Inf. Process. Syst. 2018; pp 10381–
10392.
(203) Nair, V.; Hinton, G. E. Rectiﬁed Linear
Units Improve Restricted Boltzmann Ma-
chines. Int. Conf. Mach. Learn. 2010.
(204) Behler, J. Constructing High-dimensional
Neural Network Potentials: A Tutorial
Review. Int. J. Quantum Chem. 2015,
115, 1032–1050.
(205) Gastegger, M.; Schwiedrzik, L.; Bitter-
mann, M.; Berzsenyi, F.; Marquetand, P.
wACSF – Weighted Atom-centered Sym-
metry Functions As Descriptors In Ma-
chine Learning Potentials. J. Chem. Phys.
2018, 148, 241709.
(206) Kondor, R. I.; Laﬀerty, J. Diﬀusion Ker-
nels On Graphs And Other Discrete Struc-
tures. Proceedings of the 19th interna-
70

tional conference on machine learning.
2002; pp 315–22.
(207) Vinyals, O.; Bengio, S.; Kudlur, M. Order
Matters: Sequence To Sequence For Sets.
arXiv preprint arXiv:1511.06391 2015,
(208) Grimme, S.; Antony, J.; Ehrlich, S.;
Krieg, H. A Consistent And Accurate Ab
Initio Parametrization Of Density Func-
tional Dispersion Correction (DFT-D) For
The 94 Elements H-Pu. J. Chem. Phys.
2010, 132, 154104.
(209) Unke, O.; Meuwly, M. SN2 reactions data
set. http://doi.org/10.5281/zenodo.
2605341, 2019.
(210) Monticelli, L.; Tieleman, D. P. Biomolec-
ular simulations; Springer, 2013; pp 197–
213.
(211) Friesner, R. A. Ab Initio Quantum Chem-
istry:
Methodology And Applications.
Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 2005, 102,
6648–6653.
(212) Brickel, S.; Das, A. K.; Unke, O. T.; Tu-
ran, H. T.; Meuwly, M. Reactive Molecu-
lar Dynamics For The [Cl–CH3–Br]- Re-
action In The Gas Phase And In Solution:
A Comparative Study Using Empirical
And Neural Network Force Fields. Elec-
tron. Struct. 2019, 1, 024002.
(213) Sauceda,
H.
E.;
Gastegger,
M.;
Chmiela,
S.;
M¨uller,
K.-R.;
Tkatchenko, A. Molecular Force Fields
With Gradient-domain Machine Learning
(gdml): Comparison And Synergies With
Classical Force Fields. J. Chem. Phys.
2020, 153, 124109.
(214) Szalay, P. G.; Muller, T.; Gidofalvi, G.;
Lischka, H.; Shepard, R. Multiconﬁgura-
tion Self-consistent Field And Multirefer-
ence Conﬁguration Interaction Methods
And Applications. Chem. Rev. 2012, 112,
108–181.
(215) Jia, W.; Wang, H.; Chen, M.; Lu, D.;
Liu, J.; Lin, L.; Car, R.; Zhang, L., et al.
Pushing The Limit Of Molecular Dy-
namics With Ab Initio Accuracy To 100
Million Atoms With Machine Learning.
arXiv preprint arXiv:2005.00223 2020,
(216) Sanders, H.; Saxe, J. Garbage In, Garbage
Out: How Purportedly Great Ml Models
Can Be Screwed Up By Bad Data. Pro-
ceedings of Blackhat. 2017.
(217) Blum,
V.;
Gehrke,
R.;
Hanke,
F.;
Havu, P.; Havu, V.; Ren, X.; Reuter, K.;
Scheﬄer, M. Ab Initio Molecular Simu-
lations With Numeric Atom-centered Or-
bitals. Comput. Phys. Commun. 2009,
180, 2175–2196.
(218) Cs´anyi, G.;
Albaret, T.;
Payne, M.;
De Vita, A. “Learn On The Fly”: A Hy-
brid Classical And Quantum-mechanical
Molecular Dynamics Simulation. Phys.
Rev. Lett. 2004, 93, 175503.
(219) Seung, H. S.; Opper, M.; Sompolinsky, H.
Query By Committee. Proceedings of
the Fifth Annual Workshop on Computa-
tional Learning Theory. 1992; pp 287–294.
(220) Morawietz, T.; Sharma, V.; Behler, J.
A Neural Network Potential-energy Sur-
face For The Water Dimer Based On
Environment-dependent Atomic Energies
And Charges. J. Chem. Phys. 2012, 136,
064103.
(221) Smith, J. S.; Nebgen, B.; Lubbers, N.;
Isayev, O.; Roitberg, A. E. Less Is More:
Sampling Chemical Space With Active
Learning. J. Chem. Phys. 2018, 148,
241733.
(222) Srivastava, N.; Hinton, G.; Krizhevsky, A.;
Sutskever, I.; Salakhutdinov, R. Dropout:
A Simple Way To Prevent Neural Net-
works From Overﬁtting. J. Mach. Learn.
Res. 2014, 15, 1929–1958.
(223) Gal, Y.; Ghahramani, Z. Dropout As A
Bayesian Approximation: Representing
Model Uncertainty In Deep Learning. In-
ternational Conference on Machine Learn-
ing. 2016; pp 1050–1059.
71

(224) Li, Z.; Kermode, J. R.; De Vita, A. Molec-
ular Dynamics With On-the-ﬂy Machine
Learning Of Quantum-mechanical Forces.
Phys. Rev. Lett. 2015, 114, 096405.
(225) Gastegger, M.;
Marquetand, P. Ma-
chine Learning Meets Quantum Physics;
Springer, 2020; pp 233–252.
(226) Shapeev, A.; Gubaev, K.; Tsymbalov, E.;
Podryabinkin,
E.
Machine
Learning
Meets Quantum Physics; Springer, 2020;
pp 309–329.
(227) Barducci, A.; Bonomi, M.; Parrinello, M.
Metadynamics. Wiley Interdiscip. Rev.
Comput. Mol. Sci. 2011, 1, 826–843.
(228) Herr, J. E.;
Yao, K.;
McIntyre, R.;
Toth, D. W.; Parkhill, J. Metadynam-
ics For Training Neural Network Model
Chemistries: A Competitive Assessment.
J. Chem. Phys. 2018, 148, 241710.
(229) Sugiyama, M.; Krauledat, M.; M¨uller, K.-
R. Covariate Shift Adaptation By Im-
portance Weighted Cross Validation. J.
Mach. Learn. Res. 2007, 8, 985–1005.
(230) Lemm, S.; Blankertz, B.; Dickhaus, T.;
M¨uller, K.-R. Introduction To Machine
Learning For Brain Imaging. Neuroimage
2011, 56, 387–399.
(231) Nesterov, Y. E. A Method For Solving
The Convex Programming Problem With
Convergence Rate O(1/k2). Proc. USSR
Acad. Sci. 1983; pp 543–547.
(232) Qian, N. On The Momentum Term In
Gradient Descent Learning Algorithms.
Neural Netw. 1999, 12, 145–151.
(233) Duchi, J.; Hazan, E.; Singer, Y. Adap-
tive Subgradient Methods For Online
Learning And Stochastic Optimization.
J. Mach. Learn. Res. 2011, 12.
(234) Zeiler, M. D. Adadelta:
An Adaptive
Learning Rate Method. arXiv preprint
arXiv:1212.5701 2012,
(235) Ruder, S. An Overview Of Gradient De-
scent Optimization Algorithms. arXiv
preprint arXiv:1609.04747 2016,
(236) Kingma, D. P.; Ba, J. Adam: A Method
For Stochastic Optimization. Interna-
tional Conference on Learning Represen-
tations. 2015; pp 1–13.
(237) Huber, P. J. Breakthroughs in statistics;
Springer, 1992; pp 492–518.
(238) Barron, J. T. A General And Adaptive
Robust Loss Function. Proceedings of the
IEEE Conference on Computer Vision
and Pattern Recognition. 2019; pp 4331–
4339.
(239) Chmiela, S. Towards Exact Molecular
Dynamics Simulations With Invariant
Machine-learned Models; Technische Uni-
versit¨at Berlin (Germany), 2019.
(240) Christensen, A. S.; von Lilienfeld, O. A.
On The Role Of Gradients For Machine
Learning Of Molecular Energies And
Forces. Machine Learning: Science and
Technology 2020, 1, 045018.
(241) Meyer,
R.;
Weichselbaum,
M.;
Hauser,
A.
W.
Machine
Learning
Approaches Toward Orbital-free Den-
sity Functional Theory:
Simultaneous
Training On The Kinetic Energy Density
Functional And Its Functional Derivative.
J. Chem. Theory Comput. 2020, 16,
5685–5694.
(242) Bergstra, J.; Bengio, Y. Random Search
For Hyper-parameter Optimization. J.
Mach. Learn. Res. 2012, 13, 281–305.
(243) Prechelt, L. Neural Networks: Tricks of
the trade; Springer, 1998; pp 55–69.
(244) Sch¨utt, K.; Kessel, P.; Gastegger, M.;
Nicoli, K.; Tkatchenko, A.; M¨uller, K.-R.
SchNetPack: A Deep Learning Toolbox
For Atomistic Systems. J. Chem. Theory
Comput. 2018, 15, 448–455.
72

(245) Larsen, A. H. et al. The Atomic Simula-
tion Environment – A Python Library For
Working With Atoms. J. Phys. Condens.
Matter 2017, 29, 273002.
(246) Kapil, V. et al. i-PI 2.0: A Universal Force
Engine For Advanced Molecular Simu-
lations. Comput. Phys. Commun. 2018,
236, 214–223.
(247) Paszke, A.; Gross, S.; Massa, F.; Lerer, A.;
Bradbury, J.; Chanan, G.; Killeen, T.;
Lin, Z.; Gimelshein, N.; Antiga, L., et al.
PyTorch:
An Imperative Style, High-
performance Deep Learning Library. Adv.
Neural. Inf. Process. Syst. 2019; pp 8026–
8037.
(248) Ramakrishnan, R.; Dral, P. O.; Rupp, M.;
Von Lilienfeld, O. A. Quantum Chemistry
Structures And Properties Of 134 Kilo
Molecules. Sci. Data 2014, 1, 1–7.
(249) Abadi,
M.;
Barham,
P.;
Chen,
J.;
Chen, Z.; Davis, A.; Dean, J.; Devin, M.;
Ghemawat, S.; Irving, G.; Isard, M., et al.
Tensorﬂow: A System For Large-scale Ma-
chine Learning. 12th {USENIX} sympo-
sium on operating systems design and
implementation ({OSDI} 16). 2016; pp
265–283.
(250) Plimpton, S. Fast Parallel Algorithms For
Short-range Molecular Dynamics; 1993.
(251) Wang, H.; Zhang, L.; Han, J.; Weinan, E.
DeePMD-kit: A Deep Learning Package
For Many-body Potential Energy Repre-
sentation And Molecular Dynamics. Com-
put. Phys. Commun. 2018, 228, 178–184.
(252) Himanen, L.;
J¨ager, M. O. J.;
Mo-
rooka,
E.
V.;
Federici
Canova,
F.;
Ranawat, Y. S.; Gao, D. Z.; Rinke, P.;
Foster, A. S. DScribe: Library Of Descrip-
tors For Machine Learning In Materials
Science. Comput. Phys. Commun. 2020,
247, 106949.
(253) Christensen, A.; Faber, F.; Huang, B.;
Bratholm, L.; Tkatchenko, A.; M¨uller, K.-
R.; von Lilienfeld, O. QML: A Python
Toolkit For Quantum Machine Learning.
URL
https://github.com/qmlcode/qml
2017,
(254) Unke, O. T.; Meuwly, M. Toolkit For
The Construction Of Reproducing Kernel-
based Representations Of Data: Applica-
tion To Multidimensional Potential En-
ergy Surfaces. J. Chem. Inf. Model. 2017,
57, 1923–1931.
(255) Boltzmann, L. Vorlesungen ¨uber Gasthe-
orie: 2. Teil; Leipzig: J. A. Barth, 1898.
(256) Botu, V.; Batra, R.; Chapman, J.; Ram-
prasad, R. Machine Learning Force Fields:
Construction, Validation, And Outlook.
J. Phys. Chem. C 2017, 121, 511–522.
(257) Behler, J. First Principles Neural Network
Potentials For Reactive Simulations Of
Large Molecular And Condensed Systems.
Angew. Chem. Int. Ed. 2017, 56, 12828–
12840.
(258) Deringer, V. L.; Caro, M. A.; Cs´anyi, G.
Machine Learning Interatomic Potentials
As Emerging Tools For Materials Science.
Adv. Mater. 2019, 31, 1902765.
(259) Morawietz, T.; Singraber, A.; Dellago, C.;
Behler, J. How Van Der Waals Interac-
tions Determine The Unique Properties
Of Water. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U.S.A.
2016, 113, 8368–8373.
(260) Andrade, M. F. C.; Ko, H.-Y.; Zhang, L.;
Car, R.; Selloni, A. Free Energy Of Proton
Transfer At The Water–TiO 2 Interface
From Ab Initio Deep Potential Molecular
Dynamics. Chem. Sci. 2020, 11, 2335–
2341.
(261) Deringer, V. L.; Cs´anyi, G. Machine
Learning Based Interatomic Potential For
Amorphous Carbon. Phys. Rev. B 2017,
95, 094203.
(262) Behler, J.; Martoˇn´ak, R.; Donadio, D.;
Parrinello, M. Pressure-induced Phase
73

Transitions In Silicon Studied By Neu-
ral Network-based Metadynamics Simu-
lations. Phys. Status Solidi B 2008, 245,
2618–2629.
(263) Bart´ok, A. P.; Kermode, J.; Bernstein, N.;
Cs´anyi, G. Machine Learning A General-
purpose Interatomic Potential For Silicon.
Phys. Rev. X 2018, 8, 041048.
(264) Deringer,
V.
L.;
Bernstein,
N.;
Bart´ok, A. P.;
Cliﬀe, M. J.;
Ker-
ber, R. N.; Marbella, L. E.; Grey, C. P.;
Elliott, S. R.;
Cs´anyi, G. Realistic
Atomistic
Structure
Of
Amorphous
Silicon
From
Machine-learning-driven
Molecular Dynamics. J. Phys. Chem.
Lett. 2018, 9, 2879–2885.
(265) Bonati, L.; Parrinello, M. Silicon Liquid
Structure And Crystal Nucleation From
Ab Initio Deep Metadynamics. Phys. Rev.
Lett. 2018, 121, 265701.
(266) Unke, O. T.; Castro-Palacio, J. C.; Bem-
ish, R. J.; Meuwly, M. Collision-induced
Rotational Excitation In N+
2 (2Σ+
g , v = 0)–
Ar: Comparison Of Computations And
Experiment. J. Chem. Phys. 2016, 144,
224307.
(267) Denis-Alpizar, O.; Unke, O. T.; Bem-
ish, R. J.; Meuwly, M. Quantum And
Quasiclassical Trajectory Studies Of Ro-
tational Relaxation In Ar–N+
2 Collisions.
Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys. 2017, 19,
27945–27951.
(268) Lu,
D.;
Li,
J.;
Guo,
H.
Com-
prehensive
Investigations
Of
The
Cl+CH3OH→HCl+CH3O/CH2OH
Reaction: Validation Of Experiment And
Dynamic Insights. CCS Chem. 2020, 2,
882–894.
(269) Sweeny, B. C.; Pan, H.; Kassem, A.;
Sawyer, J. C.; Ard, S. G.; Shuman, N. S.;
Viggiano, A. A.; Brickel, S.; Unke, O. T.;
Upadhyay, M., et al. Thermal Activation
Of Methane By MgO+: Temperature De-
pendent Kinetics, Reactive Molecular Dy-
namics Simulations And Statistical Mod-
eling. Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys. 2020,
22, 8913–8923.
(270) K¨aser, S.; Unke, O. T.; Meuwly, M.
Isomerization And Decomposition Reac-
tions Of Acetaldehyde Relevant To Atmo-
spheric Processes From Dynamics Simula-
tions On Neural Network-based Potential
Energy Surfaces. J. Chem. Phys. 2020,
152, 214304.
(271) Rivero, U.; Unke, O. T.; Meuwly, M.;
Willitsch, S. Reactive Atomistic Simu-
lations Of Diels-alder Reactions:
The
Importance Of Molecular Rotations. J.
Chem. Phys. 2019, 151, 104301.
(272) Liu, Q.; Zhou, X.; Zhou, L.; Zhang, Y.;
Luo, X.; Guo, H.; Jiang, B. Construct-
ing High-dimensional Neural Network Po-
tential Energy Surfaces For Gas–surface
Scattering And Reactions. J. Phys. Chem.
C 2018, 122, 1761–1769.
(273) Sch¨utt, K. T.; Sauceda, H. E.; Kinder-
mans, P.-J.; Tkatchenko, A.; M¨uller, K.-R.
SchNet – A Deep Learning Architecture
For Molecules And Materials. J. Chem.
Phys. 2018, 148, 241722.
(274) Hellstr¨om, M.; Ceriotti, M.; Behler, J.
Nuclear Quantum Eﬀects In Sodium Hy-
droxide Solutions From Neural Network
Molecular Dynamics Simulations. J. Phys.
Chem. B 2018, 122, 10158–10171.
(275) Chen, W.-K.; Liu, X.-Y.; Fang, W.-H.;
Dral, P. O.; Cui, G. Deep Learning For
Nonadiabatic Excited-state Dynamics. J.
Phys. Chem. Lett. 2018, 9, 6702–6708.
(276) Westermayr,
J.;
Gastegger,
M.;
Menger, M. F.; Mai, S.; Gonz´alez, L.;
Marquetand,
P.
Machine
Learning
Enables Long Time Scale Molecular
Photodynamics Simulations. Chem. Sci.
2019, 10, 8100–8107.
74

(277) Westermayr, J.; Gastegger, M.; Marque-
tand, P. Combining SchNet and SHARC:
The SchNarc Machine Learning Approach
For Excited-state Dynamics. J. Phys.
Chem. Lett. 2020, 11, 3828–3834.
(278) Raimbault, N.; Grisaﬁ, A.; Ceriotti, M.;
Rossi, M. Using Gaussian Process Regres-
sion To Simulate The Vibrational Raman
Spectra Of Molecular Crystals. New J.
Phys. 2019, 21, 105001.
(279) Sommers, G. M.; Andrade, M. F. C.;
Zhang, L.; Wang, H.; Car, R. Raman
Spectrum And Polarizability Of Liquid
Water From Deep Neural Networks. Phys.
Chem. Chem. Phys. 2020, 22, 10592–
10602.
(280) Hermann,
J.;
DiStasio
Jr,
R.
A.;
Tkatchenko, A. First-principles Mod-
els For Van Der Waals Interactions In
Molecules And Materials: Concepts, The-
ory, And Applications. Chem. Rev. 2017,
117, 4714–4758.
(281) Guillot, B. A Reappraisal Of What We
Have Learnt During Three Decades Of
Computer Simulations On Water. J. Mol.
Liq. 2002, 101, 219–260.
(282) Møller, C.;
Plesset, M. S. Note On
An Approximation Treatment For Many-
electron Systems. Phys. Rev. 1934, 46,
618.
(283) Dunning Jr, T. H. Gaussian Basis Sets For
Use In Correlated Molecular Calculations.
I. The Atoms Boron Through Neon And
Hydrogen. J. Chem. Phys. 1989, 90, 1007–
1023.
(284) Unke, O. T.; Brickel, S.; Meuwly, M. Sam-
pling Reactive Regions In Phase Space By
Following The Minimum Dynamic Path.
J. Chem. Phys. 2019, 150, 074107.
(285) Manzhos, S.; Carrington, T. Neural Net-
work Potential Energy Surfaces For Small
Molecules And Reactions. Chem. Rev.
2020,
(286) Spura, T.; Elgabarty, H.; K¨uhne, T. D.
“On-the-ﬂy”
Coupled
Cluster
Path-
integral Molecular Dynamics: Impact Of
Nuclear Quantum Eﬀects On The Proto-
nated Water Dimer. Phys. Chem. Chem.
Phys. 2015, 17, 14355–14359.
(287) Wang, L.; Fried, S. D.; Markland, T. E.
Proton Network Flexibility Enables Ro-
bustness And Large Electric Fields In
The Ketosteroid Isomerase Active Site.
J. Phys. Chem. B 2017, 121, 9807–9815.
(288) Litman, Y.; Richardson, J. O.; Kuma-
gai, T.; Rossi, M. Elucidating The Nu-
clear Quantum Dynamics Of Intramolec-
ular Double Hydrogen Transfer In Por-
phycene. J. Am. Chem. Soc. 2019, 141,
2526–2534.
(289) Schran, C.; Brieuc, F.; Marx, D. Con-
verged Colored Noise Path Integral Molec-
ular Dynamics Study Of The Zundel
Cation Down To Ultralow Temperatures
At Coupled Cluster Accuracy. J. Chem.
Theory Comput. 2018, 14, 5068–5078.
(290) Heisenberg, W. Original Scientiﬁc Pa-
pers Wissenschaftliche Originalarbeiten;
Springer, 1985; pp 478–504.
(291) Merchant, H. D.;
Srivastava, K. K.;
Pandey, H. D. Equations Of State And
Thermal Expansion Of Alkali Halides.
Crit. Rev. Solid State 1973, 3, 451–504.
(292) Kirchner, V.; Heinke, H.; Hommel, D.;
Domagala, J. Z.; Leszczynski, M. Thermal
Expansion Of Bulk And Homoepitaxial
GaN. Appl. Phys. Lett. 2000, 77, 1434–
1436.
(293) Jiang,
H.;
Liu,
B.;
Huang,
Y.;
Hwang,
K.
C.
Thermal
Expansion
Of
Single
Wall
Carbon
Nanotubes.
ASME. J. Eng. Mater. Technol. 2004,
126, 265–270.
(294) Kim, D. S.; Hellman, O.; Herriman, J.;
Smith, H. L.;
Lin, J. Y. Y.;
Shu-
lumba, N.; Niedziela, J. L.; Li, C. W.;
75

Abernathy, D. L.; Fultz, B. Nuclear Quan-
tum Eﬀect With Pure Anharmonicity
And The Anomalous Thermal Expansion
Of Silicon. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U.S.A.
2018, 115, 1992–1997.
(295) Hermet, P.; Koza, M. M.; Ritter, C.;
Reibel, C.; Viennois, R. Origin Of The
Highly Anisotropic Thermal Expansion
Of The Semiconducting Znsb And Rela-
tions With Its Thermoelectric Applica-
tions. RSC Adv. 2015, 5, 87118–87131.
(296) Poltavsky, I.; Zheng, L.; Mortazavi, M.;
Tkatchenko,
A.
Quantum
Tunneling
Of Thermal Protons Through Pristine
Graphene. J. Chem. Phys. 2018, 148,
204707.
(297) Markland, T. E.; Ceriotti, M. Nuclear
Quantum Eﬀects Enter The Mainstream.
Nat. Rev. Chem. 2018, 2, 0109.
(298) Freitas, R.; Asta, M.; Bulatov, V. V.
Quantum Eﬀects On Dislocation Motion
From Ring-polymer Molecular Dynamics.
npj Computational Materials 2018, 4, 55.
(299) Poltavsky,
I.;
DiStasio,
R.
A.;
Tkatchenko,
A.
Perturbed
Path
In-
tegrals In Imaginary Time: Eﬃciently
Modeling Nuclear Quantum Eﬀects In
Molecules And Materials. J. Chem. Phys.
2018, 148, 102325.
(300) Zhu, C.; Nakamura, H. The Two-state
Linear Curve Crossing Problems Revis-
ited. Iii. Analytical Approximations For
Stokes Constant And Scattering Matrix:
Nonadiabatic Tunneling Case. J. Chem.
Phys. 1993, 98, 6208–6222.
(301) Westermayr, J.; Marquetand, P. Ma-
chine Learning For Electronically Excited
States Of Molecules. Chem. Rev. 0, 0,
null.
(302) Blum, L. C.; Reymond, J.-L. 970 Mil-
lion Druglike Small Molecules For Vir-
tual Screening In The Chemical Universe
Database GDB-13. J. Am. Chem. Soc.
2009, 131, 8732–8733.
(303) Ruddigkeit,
L.;
Van
Deursen,
R.;
Blum, L. C.; Reymond, J.-L. Enumer-
ation Of 166 Billion Organic Small
Molecules In The Chemical Universe
Database GDB-17. J. Chem. Inf. Model.
2012, 52, 2864–2875.
(304) Ghasemi, S. A.; Hofstetter, A.; Saha, S.;
Goedecker, S. Interatomic Potentials For
Ionic Systems With Density Functional
Accuracy Based On Charge Densities Ob-
tained By A Neural Network. Phys. Rev.
B 2015, 92, 045131.
(305) Ko, T. W.; Finkler, J. A.; Goedecker, S.;
Behler, J. A Fourth-Generation High-
Dimensional Neural Network Potential
With Accurate Electrostatics Includ-
ing Non-Local Charge Transfer. arXiv
preprint arXiv:2009.06484 2020,
(306) Huang, B.; von Lilienfeld, O. A. The
“DNA” Of Chemistry: Scalable Quantum
Machine Learning With “amons”. arXiv
preprint arXiv:1707.04146 2017,
(307) Huang, B.; von Lilienfeld, O. A. Quan-
tum Machine Learning Using Atom-in-
molecule-based Fragments Selected On
The Fly. Nat. Chem. 2020, 12, 945—-
951.
(308) Dewar, M. J.; Thiel, W. Ground States
Of Molecules. 38. The MNDO Method.
Approximations And Parameters. J. Am.
Chem. Soc. 1977, 99, 4899–4907.
(309) Hirshfeld, F. L. Bonded-atom Fragments
For Describing Molecular Charge Densi-
ties. Theor. Chim. Acta 1977, 44, 129–
138.
(310) Wilkins, D. M.; Grisaﬁ, A.; Yang, Y.;
Lao, K. U.; DiStasio, R. A.; Ceriotti, M.
Accurate Molecular Polarizabilities With
Coupled Cluster Theory and Machine
Learning. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA
2019, 116, 3401–3406.
(311) Morawietz, T.; Behler, J. A Density-
Functional Theory-Based Neural Net-
work Potential for Water Clusters Includ-
76

ing van der Waals Corrections. J. Phys.
Chem. A 2013, 117, 7356–7366.
(312) Uteva, E.;
Graham, R. S.;
Wilkin-
son, R. D.; Wheatley, R. J. Interpolation
Of Intermolecular Potentials Using Gaus-
sian Processes. J. Chem. Phys. 2017, 147,
161706.
(313) Li, H.; Collins, C.; Tanha, M.; Gor-
don, G. J.; Yaron, D. J. A Density Func-
tional Tight Binding Layer For Deep
Learning Of Chemical Hamiltonians. J.
Chem. Theory Comput. 2018, 14, 5764–
5776.
(314) Zubatyuk, T.; Nebgen, B.; Lubbers, N.;
Smith, J. S.; Zubatyuk, R.; Zhou, G.;
Koh, C.; Barros, K.; Isayev, O.; Tretiak, S.
Machine Learned H¨uckel Theory: Inter-
facing Physics and Deep Neural Networks.
arXiv preprint arXiv:1909.12963 2019,
(315) Lahey, S.-L. J.; Rowley, C. N. Simulat-
ing Protein–Ligand Binding With Neural
Network Potentials. Chem. Sci. 2020, 11,
2362–2368.
(316) Gastegger, M.; Sch¨utt, K. T.; M¨uller, K.-
R. Machine Learning Of Solvent Eﬀects
On Molecular Spectra And Reactions.
arXiv preprint arXiv:2010.14942 2020,
(317) Zhang, P.; Shen, L.; Yang, W. Solvation
free energy calculations with quantum
mechanics/molecular mechanics and ma-
chine learning models. J. Phys. Chem. B
2018, 123, 901–908.
(318) B¨oselt, L.; Th¨urlemann, M.; Riniker, S.
Machine
Learning
In
QM/MM
Molecular
Dynamics
Simulations
Of Condensed-Phase Systems. arXiv
preprint arXiv:2010.11610 2020,
(319) Nilsson, N. J. Principles of Artiﬁcial In-
telligence; Springer Science & Business
Media, 1982.
(320) LeCun, Y.; Bengio, Y.; Hinton, G. Deep
Learning. Nature 2015, 521, 436–444.
(321) Schmidhuber, J. Deep Learning In Neural
Networks: An Overview. Neural Netw.
2015, 61, 85–117.
(322) Goodfellow, I.; Bengio, Y.; Courville, A.
Deep Learning; MIT press Cambridge,
2016.
(323) Cortes, C.; Vapnik, V. Support-vector
Networks. Machine learning 1995, 20,
273–297.
(324) Vapnik, V. The Nature Of Statistical
Learning Theory; Springer, 1995.
(325) Lapuschkin, S.; W¨aldchen, S.; Binder, A.;
Montavon, G.; Samek, W.; M¨uller, K.-R.
Unmasking Clever Hans Predictors And
Assessing What Machines Really Learn.
Nat. Comm. 2019, 10, 1096.
(326) Sauceda, H. E.; Chmiela, S.; Poltavsky, I.;
M¨uller,
K.-R.;
Tkatchenko,
A.
Ma-
chine Learning Meets Quantum Physics;
Springer, 2020; pp 277–307.
77
