IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON KNOWLEDGE AND DATA ENGINEERING
1
A Survey on Multi-Task Learning
Yu Zhang and Qiang Yang
Abstract—Multi-Task Learning (MTL) is a learning paradigm in machine learning and its aim is to leverage useful information
contained in multiple related tasks to help improve the generalization performance of all the tasks. In this paper, we give a survey for
MTL from the perspective of algorithmic modeling, applications and theoretical analyses. For algorithmic modeling, we give a deﬁnition
of MTL and then classify different MTL algorithms into ﬁve categories, including feature learning approach, low-rank approach, task
clustering approach, task relation learning approach and decomposition approach as well as discussing the characteristics of each
approach. In order to improve the performance of learning tasks further, MTL can be combined with other learning paradigms including
semi-supervised learning, active learning, unsupervised learning, reinforcement learning, multi-view learning and graphical models.
When the number of tasks is large or the data dimensionality is high, we review online, parallel and distributed MTL models as well as
dimensionality reduction and feature hashing to reveal their computational and storage advantages. Many real-world applications use
MTL to boost their performance and we review representative works in this paper. Finally, we present theoretical analyses and discuss
several future directions for MTL.
Index Terms—Multi-Task Learning, Machine Learning, Artiﬁcial Intelligence
!
1
INTRODUCTION
H
UMAN can learn multiple tasks simultaneously and during
this learning process, human can use the knowledge learned
in a task to help the learning of another task. For example,
according to our experience in learning to play tennis and squash,
we ﬁnd that the skill of playing tennis can help learn to play
squash and vice versa. Inspired by such human learning ability,
Multi-Task Learning (MTL) [1], a learning paradigm in machine
learning, aims to learn multiple related tasks jointly so that the
knowledge contained in a task can be leveraged by other tasks,
with the hope of improving the generalization performance of all
the tasks at hand.
At its early stage, an important motivation of MTL is to
alleviate the data sparsity problem where each task has a limited
number of labeled data. In the data sparsity problem, the number
of labeled data in each task is insufﬁcient to train an accurate
learner, while MTL aggregates the labeled data in all the tasks in
the spirit of data augmentation to obtain a more accurate learner
for each task. From this perspective, MTL can help reuse existing
knowledge and reduce the cost of manual labeling for learning
tasks. When the era of “big data” comes in some areas such as
computer vision and Natural Language Processing (NLP), it is
found that deep MTL models can achieve better performance than
their single-task counterparts. One reason that MTL is effective
is that it utilizes more data from different learning tasks when
compared with single-task learning. With more data, MTL can
learn more robust and universal representations for multiple tasks
and more powerful models, leading to better knowledge sharing
among tasks, better performance of each task and low risk of
overﬁtting in each task.
MTL is related to other learning paradigms in machine learn-
ing, including transfer learning [2], multi-label learning [3] and
•
Y. Zhang is with Department of Computer Science and Engineering, South-
ern University of Science and Technology and Peng Cheng Laboratory. Q.
Yang is with the Department of Computer Science and Engineering, Hong
Kong University of Science and Technology.
E-mail: yu.zhang.ust@gmail.com, qyang@cse.ust.hk
Corresponding author: Yu Zhang.
multi-output regression. The setting of MTL is similar to that of
transfer learning but with signiﬁcant differences. In MTL, there is
no distinction among different tasks and the objective is to improve
the performance of all the tasks. However, transfer learning is to
improve the performance of a target task with the help of source
tasks, hence the target task plays a more important role than
source tasks. In a word, MTL treats all the tasks equally but in
transfer learning the target task attracts most attentions. From the
perspective of the knowledge ﬂow, ﬂows of knowledge transfer in
transfer learning are from source task(s) to the target task, but in
multi-task learning, there are ﬂows of knowledge sharing between
any pair of tasks, which is illustrated in Fig. 1(a). Continual
learning [4], in which tasks come sequentially, learns tasks one by
one, while MTL is to learn multiple tasks together. In multi-label
learning and multi-output regression, each data point is associated
with multiple labels which can be categorical or numeric. If we
treat each of all the possible labels as a task, multi-label learning
and multi-output regression can be viewed in some sense as a
special case of multi-task learning where different tasks always
share the same data during both the training and testing phrases.
On the one hand, such characteristic in multi-label learning and
multi-output regression leads to different research issues from
MTL. For example, the ranking loss, which enforces the scores
(e.g., the classiﬁcation probability) of labels associated with a
data point to be larger than those of absent labels, can be used
for multi-label learning but it does not ﬁt MTL where different
tasks possess different data. On the other hand, this characteristic
in multi-label learning and multi-output regression is invalid in
MTL problems. For example, in a MTL problem discussed in
Section 2.7 where each task is to predict the disease symptom
score of Parkinson for a patient based on 19 bio-medical features,
different patients/tasks should not share the bio-medical data.
In a word, multi-label learning and multi-output regression are
different from multi-task learning as illustrated in Fig. 1(b) and
hence we will not survey literature on multi-label learning and
multi-output regression. Moreover, multi-view learning is another
learning paradigm in machine learning, where each data point is
associated with multiple views, each of which consists of a set
arXiv:1707.08114v3  [cs.LG]  29 Mar 2021

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON KNOWLEDGE AND DATA ENGINEERING
2
(a) MTL vs. transfer learning
(b) MTL vs. multi-label learning/multi-
output regression
(c) MTL vs. multi-view learning
Fig. 1. Illustrations for differences between MTL and other learning paradigms.
of features. Even though different views have different sets of
features, all the views are used together to learn for the same task
and hence multi-view learning belongs to single-task learning with
multiple sets of features, which is different from MTL as shown
in Fig. 1(c).
Over past decades, MTL has attracted many attentions in the
artiﬁcial intelligence and machine learning communities. Many
MTL models have been devised and many MTL applications
in other areas have been exploited. Moreover, many analyses
have been conducted to study theoretical problems in MTL.
This paper serves as a survey on MTL from the perspective
of algorithmic modeling, applications and theoretical analyses.
For algorithmic modeling, we ﬁrst give a deﬁnition for MTL
and then classify different MTL algorithms into ﬁve categories:
feature learning approach which can be further categorized into
feature transformation and feature selection approaches, low-
rank approach, task clustering approach, task relation learning
approach and decomposition approach. After that, we discuss the
combination of MTL with other learning paradigms, including
semi-supervised learning, active learning, unsupervised learning,
reinforcement learning, multi-view learning and graphical models.
To handle a large number of tasks, we review online, parallel and
distributed MTL models. For data in a high-dimensional space,
feature selection, dimensionality reduction and feature hashing
are introduced as vital tools to process them. As a promising
learning paradigm, MTL has many applications in various areas
and here we brieﬂy review its applications in computer vision,
bioinformatics, health informatics, speech, NLP, web, etc. From
the perspective of theoretical analyses on MTL, we review relevant
works. At last, we discuss several future directions for MTL.1
2
MTL MODELS
In order to fully characterize MTL, we ﬁrst give the deﬁnition of
MTL.
Deﬁnition
(Multi-Task Learning). Given m learning tasks
{Ti}m
i=1 where all the tasks or a subset of them are related,
multi-task learning aims to learn the m tasks together to improve
the learning of a model for each task Ti by using the knowledge
contained in all or some of other tasks.
1. For an introduction to MTL without technical details, please refer to [5].
Based on the deﬁnition of MTL, we focus on supervised
learning tasks in this section since most MTL studies fall in this
setting and for other types of tasks, we review them in the next
section. In the setting of supervised learning tasks, a task Ti is
usually accompanied by a training dataset Di consisting of ni
training samples, i.e., Di = {xi
j, yi
j}ni
j=1, where xi
j ∈Rdi is
the jth training instance in Ti and yi
j is its label. We denote by
Xi the training data matrix for Ti, i.e., Xi = (xi
1, . . . , xi
ni).
When different tasks lie in the same feature space implying that
di equals dj for any i̸ = j, this setting is the homogeneous-
feature MTL, and otherwise it corresponds to heterogeneous-
feature MTL. Without special explanation, the default MTL setting
is the homogeneous-feature MTL. Here we need to distinguish
the heterogeneous-feature MTL from the heterogeneous MTL. In
[6], the heterogeneous MTL is considered to consist of different
types of supervised tasks including classiﬁcation and regression
problems, and here we generalize it to a more general setting
that the heterogeneous MTL consists of tasks with different
types including supervised learning, unsupervised learning, semi-
supervised learning, reinforcement learning, multi-view learning
and graphical models. The opposite to the heterogeneous MTL
is the homogeneous MTL which consists of tasks with only
one type. In a word, the homogeneous and heterogeneous MTL
differ in the type of learning tasks while the homogeneous-feature
MTL is different from the heterogeneous-feature MTL in terms
of the original feature representations. Similarly, without special
explanation, the default MTL setting is the homogeneous MTL.
In order to characterize the relatedness in the deﬁnition of
MTL, there are three issues to be addressed: when to share, what
to share and how to share.
The ‘when to share’ issue is to make choices between single-
task and multi-task models for a multi-task problem. Currently
such decision is made by human experts and there are few works
to study it. A simple solution is to formulate such decision as a
model selection problem and then use model selection techniques,
e.g., cross validation, to make decisions, but this solution is usually
computational heavy and may require much more training data. An
advanced solution we think is to use multi-task models which can
degenerate to their single-task counterparts given some form of
model parameters, for example, problem (33) presented in Section
2.8 which can reduce to multiple single-task models with the
learning of different tasks decoupled when a parameter Σ becomes
diagonal. In this case, we can let the training data determine the

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON KNOWLEDGE AND DATA ENGINEERING
3
form of Σ to make an implicit choice.
‘What to share’ needs to determine the form through which
knowledge sharing among all the tasks could occur. Usually, there
are three forms for ‘what to share’, including feature, instance and
parameter. Feature-based MTL aims to learn common features
among different tasks as a way to share knowledge. Instance-
based MTL identiﬁes useful data instances in a task for other
tasks and then shares knowledge via the identiﬁed instances.
Parameter-based MTL uses model parameters (e.g., coefﬁcients
in linear models or weights in deep models) in a task to help
learn model parameters in other tasks in some ways, for example,
the regularization. Existing MTL studies mainly focus on feature-
based and parameter-based methods, and only a few works belong
to the instance-based method. A representative instance-based
method is the multi-task distribution matching method proposed
in [7], which ﬁrst estimates density ratios between probabilities
that each instance as well as its label belongs to both its own
task and a mixture of all the tasks and then uses all the weighted
training data from all the tasks based on the estimated density
ratios to learn model parameters for each task. Since the studies
on instance-based MTL are few, we mainly review feature-based
and parameter-based MTL models.
After determining ‘what to share’, ‘how to share’ speciﬁes
concrete ways to share knowledge among tasks. In feature-based
MTL, there is a primary approach: feature learning approach. The
feature learning approach focuses on learning common feature
representations for multiple tasks based on shallow or deep mod-
els, where the learned common feature representation can be a
subset or a transformation of the original feature representation.
In parameter-based MTL, there are four main approaches: low-
rank approach, task clustering approach, task relation learning
approach and decomposition approach. The low-rank approach
interprets the relatedness of multiple tasks as the low rankness of
the parameter matrix of these tasks. The task clustering approach is
to identify task clusters, each of which contains similar tasks. The
task relation learning approach aims to learn quantitative relations
between tasks from data automatically. The decomposition ap-
proach decomposes the model parameters of all the tasks into two
or more components, which are penalized by different regularizers.
In summary, there are mainly ﬁve approaches in the feature-
based and parameter-based MTL. In the following sections, we
review these approaches in a chronological order to reveal the
relations and evolutions among different models.
2.1
Feature Learning Approach
Since tasks are related, it is intuitive to assume that different tasks
share a common feature representation based on the original fea-
tures. One reason to learn common feature representations instead
of directly using the original ones is that the original representation
may not have enough expressive power for multiple tasks. With the
training data in all the tasks, a more powerful representation can
be learned for all the tasks and this representation can bring the
improvement on the performance.
Based on the relationship between the original feature repre-
sentation and the learned one, we can further classify this category
into two sub-categories. The ﬁrst sub-category is the feature
transformation approach where the learned representation is a
linear or nonlinear transformation of the original representation
and in this approach, each feature in the learned representation is
different from the original features. Different from this approach,
the feature selection approach, the second sub-category, selects a
subset of the original features as the learned representation and
hence the learned representation is similar to the original one
by eliminating useless features based on different criteria. In the
following, we introduce these two approaches.
2.1.1
Feature Transformation Approach
The multi-layer feedforward neural network [1], which belongs to
the feature transformation approach, is one of the earliest model
for multi-task learning. To see how the multi-layer feedforward
neural network is constructed for MTL, in Figure 2 we show
an example with an input layer, a hidden layer and an output
layer. The input layer receives training instances from all the
tasks and the output layer has m output units with one for each
task. Here the outputs of the hidden layer can be viewed as the
common feature representation learned for the m tasks and the
transformation from the original representation to the learned one
depends on the weights connecting the input and hidden layers as
well as the activation function adopted in the hidden units. Hence,
if the activation function in the hidden layer is linear, then the
transformation is a linear function and otherwise it is nonlinear.
Compared with multi-layer feedforward neural networks used for
single-task learning, the difference in the network architecture lies
in the output layers where in single-task learning, there is only
one output unit while in MTL, there are m ones. In [8], the
radial basis function network, which has only one hidden layer,
is extended to MTL by greedily determining the structure of the
hidden layer. Different from these neural network models, Silver
et al. [9] propose a context-sensitive multi-task neural network
which has only one output unit shared by different tasks but has a
task-speciﬁc context as an additional input.
Fig. 2. An example for the multi-task feedforward neural network with an
input layer, a hidden layer and an output layer.
Different from multi-layer feedforward neural networks which
are connectionist models, the multi-task feature learning (MTFL)
method [10] is formulated under the regularization framework
with the objective function as
min
A,U,b
m
X
i=1
1
ni
ni
X
j=1
l(yi
j, (ai)T UT xi
j + bi) + λ∥A∥2
2,1
s.t. UUT = I,
(1)
where l(·, ·) denotes a loss function such as the hinge loss or
square loss, b = (b1, . . . , bm)T is a vector of offsets in all the
tasks, U ∈Rd×d is a square transformation matrix, A ∈Rd×m
contains model parameters of all the tasks with its ith column ai
as model parameters for the ith task after the transformation, the
ℓ2,1 norm of a matrix A denoted by ∥A∥2,1 equals the sum of
the ℓ2 norm of rows in A, I denotes an identity matrix with an
appropriate size, and λ is a positive regularization parameter. The

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON KNOWLEDGE AND DATA ENGINEERING
4
ﬁrst term in the objective function of problem (1) measures the
empirical loss on the training sets of all the tasks and the second
one is to enforce A to be row-sparse via the ℓ2,1 norm which is
equivalent to selecting features after the transformation, while the
constraint enforces U to be orthogonal. Different from the multi-
layer feedforward neural network whose hidden representations
may be redundant, the orthogonality of U can prevent the MTFL
method from it. As proved in [10], problem (1) is equivalent to
min
W,D,b L(W, b) + λtr(WT D−1W) s.t. D ⪰0, tr(D) ≤1, (2)
where L(W, b) = Pm
i=1
1
ni
Pni
j=1 l(yi
j, (wi)T xi
j + bi) denotes
the total training loss, tr(·) denotes the trace of a square matrix,
wi = Uai is the model parameter for Ti, W = (w1, . . . , wm),
0 denotes a zero vector or matrix with an appropriate size,
M−1 for any square matrix M denotes its inverse when it is
nonsingular or otherwise its pseudo inverse, and B ⪰C means
that B −C is positive semideﬁnite. Based on this formulation,
we can see that the MTFL method is to learn a feature covari-
ance D for all the tasks, which will be interpreted in Section
2.8 from a probabilistic perspective. Given D, the learning of
different tasks can be decoupled and this can facilitate the parallel
computing. When given W, D has an analytical solution as
D = (WT W)
1
2 /tr

(WT W)
1
2

and by plugging this solution
into problem (2), we can see that the regularizer on W is the
squared trace norm. Then Argyriou et al. [11] extend problem (2)
to a general formulation where the second term in the objective
function becomes λtr(WT f(D)W) with f(D) operating on the
spectrum of D and discuss the condition on f(·) to make the
whole problem convex.
Similar to the MTFL method, the multi-task sparse coding
method [12] is to learn a linear transformation on features with
the objective function formulated as
min
A,U,b L(UA, b) s.t. ∥ai∥1 ≤λ ∀i ∈[m], ∥uj∥2 ≤1 ∀j ∈[D],
(3)
where ai, the ith column of A, contains model parameters of the
ith task, uj is the jth column in U, [c] for an integer c denotes a
set of integers from 1 to c, ∥· ∥1 denotes the ℓ1 norm of a vector
or matrix and equals the sum of the absolute value of its entries,
and ∥·∥2 denotes the ℓ2 norm of a vector. Here the transformation
U ∈Rd×D is also called the dictionary in sparse coding and
shared by all the tasks. Compared with the MTFL method where
U in problem (1) is a d × d orthogonal matrix, U in problem
(3) is overcomplete, which implies that D is larger than d, with
each column having a bounded ℓ2 norm. Another difference is
that in problem (1) A is enforced to be row-sparse but in problem
(3) it is only sparse via the ﬁrst constraint. With a similar idea
to the multi-task sparse coding method, Zhu et al. [13] propose
a multi-task inﬁnite support vector machine via the Indian buffet
process and the difference is that in [13] the dictionary is sparse
and model parameters are non-sparse. In [14], the spike and slab
prior is used to learn sparse model parameters for multi-output
regression problems where transformed features are induced by
Gaussian processes and shared by different outputs.
Recently deep learning becomes popular due to its capacity to
learn nonlinear features, which facilitates the learning of invariant
features for multiple tasks, and hence many deep multi-task mod-
els belonging to this approach have been proposed with each task
modeled by a deep neural network. Here we classify deep multi-
task models in this approach into three main categories. The ﬁrst
category [15], [16], [17], [18], [19] is to learn a common feature
representation for multiple tasks by sharing ﬁrst several layers in a
similar architecture to Fig. 2. However, different from Fig. 2, deep
MTL models in this category have a large number of shared layers,
which have general structures such as convolutional layers and
pooling layers. Building on the ﬁrst category, the second category
is to use adversarial learning, which is inspired by generative
adversarial networks, to learn a common feature representation
for MTL as did in [20], [21]. Speciﬁcally, there are three networks
in such adversarial multi-task models, including a feature network
Nf, a classiﬁcation network Nc and a domain network Nd. Based
on Nf, Nc is to minimize the training loss for all the tasks, while
Nd aims to distinguish which task a data instance is from. The
objective function of such models is usually formulated as
min
θf ,θc max
θd
m
X
i=1
1
ni
ni
X
j=1

l(yi
j, Nc(Nf(xi
j))) −lce(di
j, Nd(Nf(xi
j)))

,
where θf, θc, θd denote parameters of three networks Nf, Nc, Nd,
respectively, di
j ∈{1, . . . , m} denotes the task index/label of xi
j,
and lce(·, ·) denotes the cross-entropy loss. Based on this minimax
problem, Nf is to minimize the training loss for all the tasks and
maximize the cross-entropy loss to fool the domain network to
make the learned feature representation indistinguishable to all the
tasks. When there is no domain network, this category can reduce
to the ﬁrst category. Moreover, in [21], each task can learn its
speciﬁc feature representation to increase the expressive power of
the whole model. The last category is to learn different but related
feature representations for different tasks with the cross-stitch net-
work [22] as a representative model. Speciﬁcally, given two tasks
A and B with an identical network architecture, xi,j
A (xi,j
B ) denotes
the hidden feature outputted by the jth unit of the ith hidden layer
for task A (B). Then we can deﬁne the cross-stitch operation
on xi,j
A
and xi,j
B
as

˜xi,j
A
˜xi,j
B

=

αAA
αAB
αBA
αBB
 
xi,j
A
xi,j
B

,
where ˜xi,j
A and ˜xi,j
B are new hidden features after learning the
two tasks jointly. When both αAB and αBA equal 0, training the
two networks jointly is equivalent to training them independently.
The network architecture of the cross-stitch network is shown in
Fig. 3. Here matrix α, which is deﬁned as α ≡

αAA
αAB
αBA
αBB

,
encodes feature-level task relations between the two tasks and it
can be learned via the backpropagation method.
Fig. 3. The architecture for the cross-stitch network.
2.1.2
Feature Selection Approach
One way to do feature selection in MTL is to use the ℓp,q
norm denoted by ∥W∥p,q ≡∥(∥w1∥p, . . . , ∥wd∥p)∥q, where
wi denotes the ith row of W and ∥· ∥p denotes the ℓp norm of
a vector, to achieve the group sparsity. Obozinski et al. [23] are
among the ﬁrst to study the multi-task feature selection (MTFS)
problem based on the ℓ2,1 norm with the objective function
formulated as
min
W,b L(W, b) + λ∥W∥2,1.
(4)
The regularizer on W in problem (4) is to enforce W to be row-
sparse, which in turn helps select important features. In [23], a
path-following algorithm is proposed to solve problem (4) and

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON KNOWLEDGE AND DATA ENGINEERING
5
then Liu et al. [24] employ an optimal ﬁrst-order optimization
method to solve it. Compared with problem (1), we can see that
problem (4) is similar to the MTFL method without learning the
transformation U. Lee et al. [25] propose a weighted ℓ2,1 norm
for multi-task feature selection where the weights can be learned
as well and problem (4) is extended in [26] to a general case
where feature groups can overlap with each other. In order to make
problem (4) more robust to outliers, a square-root loss function is
investigated in [27]. Moreover, in order to make speedup, a safe
screening method is proposed in [28] to ﬁlter out useless features
corresponding to zero rows in W before optimizing problem (4).
Liu et al. [29] propose to use the ℓ∞,1 norm to select features with
the objective function formulated as
min
W,b L(W, b) + λ∥W∥∞,1.
(5)
A block coordinate descent method is proposed to solve problem
(5). In general, we can use the ℓp,q norm to select features for
MTL.
In order to attain a more sparse subset of features, Gong et al.
[30] propose a capped-ℓp,1 regularizer for multi-task feature se-
lection where p = 1 or 2 and the objective function is formulated
as
min
W,b L(W, b) + λ
d
X
i=1
min(∥wi∥p, θ),
(6)
where wi denotes the ith row of W. With a given threshold θ,
the capped-ℓp,1 regularizer (i.e., the second term in problem (6))
focuses on rows with smaller ℓp norms than θ, which is more
likely to be sparse. When θ becomes large enough, the capped-ℓp,1
regularizer becomes ∥W∥p,1 and hence problem (6) degenerates
to problem (4) or (5) when p equals 2 or ∞.
Lozano and Swirszcz [31] propose a multi-level Lasso for
MTL where the (j, i)th entry in the parameter matrix W is deﬁned
as wji = θj ˆwji. When θj is equal to 0, wji becomes 0 for i ∈[m]
and hence the jth feature is not selected by the model. In this
sense, θj controls the global sparsity for the jth feature among
the m tasks. Moreover, when ˆwji becomes 0, wji is also 0 for i
only, implying that the jth feature is not useful for task Ti, and so
ˆwji is a local indicator for the sparsity in task Tj. Based on these
observations, θj and ˆwji are expected to be sparse, leading to the
objective function formulated as
min
θ, ˆ
W,b L(W, b) + λ1∥θ∥1 + λ2∥ˆ
W∥1 s.t. wji = θj ˆwji, θj ≥0, (7)
where θ = (θ1, . . . , θd)T ,
ˆ
W = (ˆw1, . . . , ˆwm), and the
nonnegative constraint on θj is to keep the model identiﬁability.
It has been proved in [31] that problem (7) leads to a regularizer
Pd
j=1
p
∥wj∥1, the square root of the ℓ1, 1
2 norm regularization.
Moreover, Wang et al. [32] extend problem (7) to a general situ-
ation where the regularizer becomes λ1
Pm
i=1 ∥ˆwi∥p
p + λ2∥θ∥q
q.
By utilizing a priori information describing the task relations in a
hierarchical structure, Han et al. [33] propose a multi-component
product based decomposition for wij where the number of com-
ponents in the decomposition can be arbitrary instead of only 2 in
[31], [32]. Similar to [31], Jebara [34] proposes to learn a binary
indicator vector to do multi-task feature selection based on the
maximum entropy discrimination formalism.
Similar to [33] where a priori information is given to describe
task relations in a hierarchical/tree structure, Kim and Xing [35]
utilize the given tree structure to design a regularizer on W as
f(W) = Pd
i=1
P
v∈V λv∥wi,Gv∥2, where V denotes the set of
nodes in the given tree structure, Gv denotes the set of leaf nodes
(i.e., tasks) in a sub-tree rooted at node v, and wi,Gv denotes a
subvector of the ith row of W indexed by Gv. This regularizer
not only enforces each row of W to be sparse as the ℓ2,1 norm
did in problem (4), but also induces the sparsity in subsets of each
row in W based on the tree structure.
Different from conventional multi-task feature selection meth-
ods which assume that different tasks share a set of original
features, Zhou et al. [36] consider a different scenario where
useful features in different tasks have no overlapping. In order
to achieve this, an exclusive Lasso model is proposed with the
objective function formulated as
min
W,b L(W, b) + λ∥W∥2
1,2,
where the regularizer is the squared ℓ1,2 norm on W.
Another way to select common features for MTL is to use
sparse priors to design probabilistic or Bayesian models. For
ℓp,1-regularized multi-task feature selection, Zhang et al. [37]
propose a probabilistic interpretation where the ℓp,1 regularizer
corresponds to a generalized normal prior: wji ∼GN(·|0, ρj, p),
where · denotes a (random) variable when we do not want to
introduce it explicitly. Based on this interpretation, Zhang et
al. [37] further propose a probabilistic framework for multi-task
feature selection, in which task relations and outlier tasks can be
identiﬁed, based on the matrix-variate generalized normal prior.
In [38], a generalized horseshoe prior is proposed to do feature
selection for MTL as:
P(wi) =
Z
d
Y
j=1
N(wji|0, uji
vji )N(ui|0, ρ2C)N(vi|0, γ2C)duidvi,
where N(·|m, σ) denotes a univariate or multivariate normal dis-
tribution with m as the mean and σ as the variance or covariance
matrix, uji and vji are the jth entries in ui and vi, respectively,
and ρ, γ are hyperparameters. Here C shared by all the tasks
denotes the feature correlation matrix to be learned from data
and it encodes an assumption that different tasks share identical
feature correlations. When C becomes an identity matrix which
means that features are independent, this prior degenerates to the
horseshoe prior.
Hern´andez-Lobato et al. [39] propose a probabilistic model
based on the horseshoe prior as
P(wji) =
h
π(wji)ηjiδ
1−ηji
0
izj h
π(wji)τjiδ
1−τji
0
iωi(1−zj)
h
π(wji)γjδ
1−γj
0
i(1−ωi)(1−zj)
,
(8)
where δ0 is the probability mass function at zero and π(·) denotes
the density function of non-zero coefﬁcients. In Eq. (8), zj indi-
cates whether feature j is an outlier (zj = 1) or not (zj = 0) and
ωi indicates whether task Ti is an outlier (ωi = 1) or not (ωi = 0).
Moreover, ηji and τji indicate whether feature j is relevant for
the prediction in Ti (ηji, τji = 1) or not (ηji, τji = 0), and γj
indicates whether a non-outlier feature j is relevant (γj = 1) for
the prediction or not (γj = 0) in all non-outlier tasks. Based on
the above deﬁnitions, the three terms in the right-hand side of Eq.
(8) specify probability density functions of wji based on different
situations of features and tasks. So this model can also handle
outlier tasks but in a different way from [37].
2.1.3
Comparison between Two Sub-categories
The two sub-categories have different characteristics where the
feature transformation approach learns a transformation of the
original features as the new representation but the feature selection
approach selects a subset of the original features as the new
representation for all the tasks. Based on the characteristics of
those two approaches, the feature selection approach can be

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON KNOWLEDGE AND DATA ENGINEERING
6
viewed as a special case of the feature transformation approach
when the transformation matrix is a diagonal 0/1 matrix where
the diagonal entries with value 1 correspond to the selected
features. By selecting a subset of the original features as the
new representation, the feature selection approach has a better
interpretability.
2.2
Low-Rank Approach
The relatedness among multiple tasks can imply the low-rank of
W, leading to the low-rank approach. For example, if the ith, jth
and kth tasks are related in that the model parameter wi of the ith
task is a linear combination of those of the other two tasks, then it
is easy to show that the rank of W is at most m −1 and hence of
low rank. From this perspective, the more the relatedness is, the
lower the rank of W is.
Ando and Zhang [40] assume that model parameters of differ-
ent tasks share a low-rank subspace in part and speciﬁcally, wi
takes the following form as
wi = ui + ΘT vi.
(9)
Here Θ ∈Rh×d is the shared low-rank subspace by multiple
tasks where h < d. Then we can write in a matrix form as W =
U + ΘT V. Based on the form of W, the objective function
proposed in [40] is formulated as
min
U,V,Θ,b L(U + ΘT V, b) + λ∥U∥2
F s.t. ΘΘT = I,
(10)
where ∥· ∥F denotes the Frobenius norm. The orthonormal con-
straint on Θ in problem (10) makes the subspace non-redundant.
When λ is large enough, the optimal U can become a zero matrix
and hence problem (10) is very similar to problem (1) except that
there is no regularization on V in problem (10) and that Θ has a
smaller number of rows than columns. Chen et al. [41] generalize
problem (10) as
min
U,V,Θ,b
L(W, b) + λ1∥U∥2
F + λ2∥W∥2
F
s.t.
W = U + ΘT V, ΘΘT = I.
(11)
When setting λ2 to be 0, problem (11) reduces to problem (10).
Even though problem (11) is non-convex, with some convex
relaxation technique, it can be relaxed to the following convex
problem as
min
W,b,M L(W, b) + λtr
 WT (M + ηI)−1 W

s.t. tr(M) = h
0 ⪯M ⪯I, (12)
where η = λ2/λ1 and λ = λ1η(η + 1). One advantage of
problem (12) over problem (11) is that the global optimum of
the convex problem (12) is much easier to be obtained than that
of the non-convex problem (11). Compared with the alternative
objective function (2) in the MTFL method, problem (12) has a
similar formulation where M models the feature covariance for all
the tasks. Problem (10) is extended in [42] to a general case where
different wi’s lie in a manifold instead of a subspace. Moreover,
in [43], a latent variable model is proposed for W with the same
decomposition as Eq. (9) and it can provide a framework for MTL
by modeling more cases than problem (10) such as task clustering,
sharing sparse representation, duplicate tasks and evolving tasks.
It is well known that using the trace norm as a regularizer
can make a matrix have low rank and hence this regularization is
suitable for MTL. Speciﬁcally, an objective function with the trace
norm regularization is proposed in [44] as
min
W,b L(W, b) + λ∥W∥S(1),
(13)
where µi(W) denotes the ith smallest singular value of W and
∥W∥S(1) = Pmin(m,d)
i=1
µi(W) denotes the trace norm of matrix
W. Based on the trace norm, Han and Zhang [45] propose a
capped trace regularizer with the objective function formulated as
min
W,b L(W, b) + λ
min(m,d)
X
i=1
min(µi(W), θ).
(14)
With the use of the threshold θ, the capped trace regularizer only
penalizes small singular values of W, which is related to the
determination of the rank of W. When θ is large enough, the
capped trace regularizer will become the trace norm and hence
problem (14) will reduce to problem (13). Moreover, a spectral
k-support norm is proposed in [46] as an improvement over the
trace norm regularization.
The trace norm regularization has been extended to regularize
model parameters in deep multi-task models. Speciﬁcally, the
weights in the last several fully connected layers of deep multi-task
neural networks can be viewed as the parameters of learners for
all the tasks. In this view, the weights connecting two consecutive
layers for one task can be organized in a matrix and hence the
weights of all the tasks can form a tensor. Based on such tensor
representations, several tensor trace norms, which are based on the
trace norm, are used in [47] as regularizers to identify the low-rank
structure of the parameter tensor.
2.3
Task Clustering Approach
The task clustering approach assumes that different tasks form
several clusters, each of which consists of similar tasks. As
indicated by its name, this approach has a close connection with
clustering algorithms and it can be viewed as an extension of
clustering algorithms to the task level while the conventional
clustering algorithms are on the data level.
Thrun and Sullivan [48] propose the ﬁrst task clustering
algorithm by using a weighted nearest neighbor classiﬁer for each
task, where the initial weights to deﬁne the weighted Euclidean
distance are learned by minimizing pairwise within-class distances
and maximizing pairwise between-class distances simultaneously
within each task. Then a task transfer matrix A is deﬁned with its
(i, j)th entry aij recording the generalization accuracy obtained
for task Ti by using task Tj’s distance metric. Based on A, m
tasks can be grouped into r clusters {Ci}r
i=1 by maximizing
Pr
t=1
1
|Ct|
P
i,j∈Ct aij, where | · | denotes the cardinality of a
set. After obtaining the cluster structure among all the tasks, the
training data of tasks in a cluster will be pooled together to learn
the ﬁnal weighted nearest neighbor classiﬁer. This approach has
been extended to an iterative learning process [49] in a similar
way to k-means clustering.
Bakker and Heskes [50] propose a multi-task Bayesian neural
network model with the network structure similar to Fig. 2 where
input-to-hidden weights are shared by all the tasks but hidden-
to-output weights are task-speciﬁc. By deﬁning wi as the vector
of hidden-to-output weights for task Ti, the multi-task Bayesian
neural network assigns a mixture of Gaussian prior to it: wi ∼
Pr
j=1 πjN(·|mj, Σj), where πj, mj and Σj specify the prior,
the mean and the covariance in the jth cluster. For tasks in a
cluster, they will share a Gaussian distribution. When r equals
1, this model degenerates to a case where model parameters of
different tasks share a prior, which is similar to several Bayesian
MTL models such as [51], [52], [53] that are based on Gaussian
processes and t processes.

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON KNOWLEDGE AND DATA ENGINEERING
7
Xue et al. [54] deploy the Dirichlet process to do clustering on
task level. Speciﬁcally, it deﬁnes the prior on wi as
wi ∼G, G ∼DP(α, G0) ∀i ∈[m],
where DP(α, G0) denotes a Dirichlet process with α as a
positive scaling parameter and G0 a base distribution. To see
the clustering effect, by integrating out G, the conditional dis-
tribution of wi, given model parameters of other tasks W−i =
{· · · , wi−1, wi+1, · · · }, is
P(wi|W−i, α, G0) =
α
m −1 + αG0 +
1
m −1 + α
m
X
j=1,j̸=i
δwj,
where δwj denotes the distribution concentrated at a single point
wj. So wi can be equal to either wj (j̸ = i) with probability
1
m−1+α, which corresponds to the case that those two tasks lie
in the same cluster, or a new sample from G0 with probability
α
m−1+α, which is the case that task Ti forms a new task cluster.
When α is large, the chance to form a new task cluster is large and
so α affects the number of task clusters. This model is extended
in [55], [56] to a case where different tasks in a task cluster share
useful features via a matrix stick-breaking process and a beta-
Bernoulli hierarchical prior, respectively, and in [57] where each
task is a compressive sensing task. Moreover, a nested Dirichlet
process is proposed in [58], [59] to use Dirichlet processes to
learn both task clusters and the state structure of an inﬁnite hidden
Markov model, which handles sequential data in each task. In [60],
wi is decomposed as wi = ui + ΘT
i vi similar to Eq. (9), where
ui and Θi are sampled according to a Dirichlet process.
Different from [50], [54], Jacob et al. [61] aim to learn task
clusters under the regularization framework by considering three
orthogonal aspects, including a global penalty to measure on
average how large the parameters, a measure of between-cluster
variance to quantify the distance among different clusters and a
measure of within-cluster variance to quantify the compactness
of task clusters. By combining these three aspects and adopting
some convex relaxation technique, a convex objective function is
formulated as
min
W,b,Σ L(W, b) + λtr(W11T WT ) + tr( ˜
WΣ−1 ˜
WT )
s.t. ˜
W = WΠ, αI ⪯Σ ⪯βI, tr(Σ) = γ,
(15)
where Π denotes the m×m centering matrix, 1 denotes a column
vector of all ones with its size depending on the context, and
α, β, γ are hyperparameters.
Kang et al. [62] extend the MTFL method [10] to the case with
multiple task clusters and aim to minimize the squared trace norm
in each cluster. A diagonal matrix, Qi ∈Rm×m, is deﬁned as a
cluster indicator matrix for the ith cluster. The jth diagonal entry
of Qi is equal to 1 if task Tj lies in the ith cluster and otherwise
0. Since each task can belong to only one cluster, it is easy to see
that Pr
i=1 Qi = I. Based on these considerations, the objective
function is formulated as
min
W,b,{Qi} L(W, b) + λ
r
X
i=1
∥WQi∥2
S(1) s.t.Qi ∈{0, 1}m×m
Pr
i=1 Qi = I
.
When r equals 1, this method reduces to the MTFL method.
Han and Zhang [63] devise a structurally sparse regularizer to
cluster tasks with the objective function as
min
W,b L(W, b) + λ
X
j>i
∥wi −wj∥2.
(16)
Problem (16) is a special case of the method proposed in [63]
with only one level of task clusters. The regularizer on W
enforces any pair of columns in W to have a chance to be
identical and after solving problem (16), the cluster structure can
be discovered by comparing columns in W. One advantage of this
structurally sparse regularizer is that the convex problem (16) can
automatically determine the number of task clusters.
Barzilai and Crammer [64] propose a task clustering method
by deﬁning W as W = FG where F ∈Rd×r and G ∈
{0, 1}r×m. With an assumption that each task belongs to only
one cluster, the objective function is formulated as
min
F,G,b L(FG, b) + λ∥F∥2
F s.t.
G ∈{0, 1}r×m
∥gi∥2 = 1 ∀i ∈[m],
(17)
where gi denotes the ith column of G. When using the hinge
loss or logistic loss, this non-convex problem can be relaxed to
a min-max problem, which has a global optimum, by utilizing
the dual problem with respect to W and b and discarding some
non-convex constraints.
Zhou and Zhao [65] aim to cluster tasks by identifying repre-
sentative tasks which are a subset of the given m tasks. If task Ti is
selected by task Tj as a representative task, then it is expected that
model parameters for Tj are similar to those of Ti. zij is deﬁned
as the probability that task Tj selects task Ti as its representative
task. Then based on a matrix Z whose (i, j)th entry is zij, the
objective function is formulated as
min
W,b,ZL(W, b) + λ1∥W∥2
F + λ2
m
X
i=1
m
X
j=1
zij∥wi −wj∥2
2 + λ3∥Z∥2,1
s.t. Z ≥0, ZT 1 = 1.
(18)
The third term in the objective function of problem (18) enforces
the closeness of each pair of tasks based on Z and the last term
employs the ℓ2,1 norm to enforce the row sparsity of Z which
implies that the number of representative tasks is limited. The
constraints in problem (18) guarantee that entries in Z deﬁne valid
probabilities. Problem (18) is related to problem (16) since the
regularizer in problem (16) can be reformulated as 2 P
j>i ∥wi −
wj∥2 = minˆZ≥0
P
j>i

ˆzij∥wi −wj∥2
2 +
1
ˆzij

, where both
the regularizer and constraint on ˆZ are different from those on
Z in problem (18).
Previous studies assume that each task can belong to only one
task cluster and this assumption seems too restrictive. In [66],
a GO-MTL method relaxes this assumption by allowing a task
to belong to more than one cluster and deﬁnes a decomposition
of W similar to problem (17) as W = LS where L ∈Rd×r
denotes the latent basis with r < m and S ∈Rr×m contains
linear combination coefﬁcients for all the tasks. S is assumed to
be sparse since each task is generated from only a few columns
in L or equivalently belongs to a small number of clusters. The
objective function is formulated as
min
L,S,b L(LS, b) + λ1∥S∥1 + λ2∥L∥2
F .
(19)
Compared with the objective function of multi-task sparse cod-
ing, i.e., problem (3), we can see that when the regularization
parameters take appropriate values, these two problems are almost
equivalent except that in multi-task sparse coding, the dictionary
U is overcomplete, while here the number of columns in S is
smaller than that of its rows. This method has been extended in
[67] to decompose the parameter tensor in the fully connected
layers of deep neural networks.
Among the aforementioned methods, the method in [48] ﬁrst
identiﬁes the cluster structure and then learns the model param-
eters of all the tasks separately, which is not preferred since
the cluster structure learned may be suboptimal for the model
parameters, hence follow-up works learn model parameters and

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON KNOWLEDGE AND DATA ENGINEERING
8
the cluster structure together. An important problem in clustering
is to determine the number of clusters and this is also important
for this approach. Out of the above methods, only methods
in [54], [63] can automatically determine the number of task
clusters, where the method in [54] depends on the capacity of
the Dirichlet process while the method in [63] relies on the use
of a structurally sparse regularizer. Among all those models, some
belong to Bayesian learning, i.e., [50], [54], while the rest models
are regularized models. Among those regularized methods, only
the objective function proposed in [63] is convex while others are
originally non-convex.
The task clustering approach is related to the low-rank ap-
proach. To see that, suppose that there are r task clusters (r < m)
and all the tasks in a cluster share the same model parameters,
making the parameter matrix W low-rank with the rank at most
r. From the perspective of modeling, by setting ui to be a zero
vector in Eq. (9), we can see that the decomposition of W in
[40] becomes similar to those in [64], [66], which in some sense
shows the relation between those two approaches. Moreover, the
equivalence between problems (12) and (15), two typical methods
in the low-rank and task clustering approaches, has been proved in
[68]. The task clustering approach can visualize the learned cluster
structure, which is an advantage over the low-rank approach.
2.4
Task Relation Learning Approach
In MTL, tasks are related and the task relatedness can be quan-
titated via task similarity, task correlation, task covariance and
so on. Here we use task relations to include all the quantitative
relatedness.
In earlier studies on MTL, task relations are assumed to be
known as a priori information. In [69], [70], each task is assumed
to be similar to any other task and so model parameters of each
task will be enforced to approach the average model parameters of
all the tasks. In [71], [72], task similarities for each pair of tasks
are given and these studies utilize the task similarities to design
regularizers to guide the learning of multiple tasks in a principle
that the more similar two tasks are, the closer the corresponding
model parameters are expected to be. A similar formulation to [71]
is proposed in [73] to estimate the mean of multiple distributions
by learning pairwise task relations and another similar formulation
is proposed in [74] for log-density gradient estimation. Given
a tree structure describing relations among tasks in [75], model
parameters of a task corresponding to a node in the tree are
enforced to be similar to those of its parent node.
However, in most applications, task relations are not available.
In this case, learning task relations from data automatically is
a good option. Bonilla et al. [76] propose a multi-task Gaus-
sian process (MTGP) by deﬁning a prior on f i
j, the functional
value for xi
j, as f ∼N(·|0, Σ), where f = (f 1
1 , . . . , f m
nm)T
contains the functional values for all the training data. Σ, the
covariance matrix, deﬁnes the covariance between f i
j and f p
q
as σ(f i
j, f p
q ) = ωipk(xi
j, xp
q), where k(·, ·) denotes a kernel
function and ωip describes the covariance between tasks Ti and
Tp. In order to keep Σ positive deﬁnite, a matrix Ωcontaining
ωip as its (i, p)th entry is also required to be positive deﬁnite,
which makes Ωthe task covariance to describe the similarities
between tasks. Then based on the Gaussian likelihood for labels
given f, the analytically marginal likelihood by integrating out f
can be used to learn Ωfrom data. In [77], the learning curve and
generalization bound of the MTGP are studied. Since Ωin MTGP
has a point estimation which may lead to the overﬁtting, based on
a proposed weight-space view of MTGP, Zhang and Yeung [78]
propose a multi-task generalized t process by placing an inverse-
Wishart prior on Ωas Ω∼IW(·|ν, Ψ), where ν denotes the
degree of freedom and Ψ is the base covariance for generating Ω.
Since Ψ models the covariance between pairs of tasks, it can be
determined based on the maximum mean discrepancy (MMD).
Different from [76], [78] which are Bayesian models, Zhang
and Yeung [79], [80] propose a regularized multi-task model called
multi-task relationship learning (MTRL) by placing a matrix-
variate normal prior on W as
W ∼MN(·|0, I, Ω),
(20)
where MN(·|M, A, B) denotes a matrix-variate normal distri-
bution with M as the mean, A the row covariance, and B the
column covariance. Based on this prior as well as some likeli-
hood function, the objective function for a modiﬁed maximum a
posterior solution is formulated as
min
W,b,ΩL(W, b) + λ1∥W∥2
F + λ2tr(WΩ−1WT )
s.t. Ω≻0, tr(Ω) ≤1,
(21)
where the second term in the objective function is to penalize
the complexity of W, the last term is due to the matrix-variate
normal prior, and the constraints control the complexity of the
positive deﬁnite covariance matrix Ω. It has been proved in [79],
[80] that problem (21) is jointly convex with respect to W, b
and Ω. Problem (21) has been extended to multi-task boosting
[81] and multi-label learning [82] by learning label correlations.
Problem (21) can also been interpreted from the perspective of
reproducing kernel Hilbert spaces for vector-valued functions [83],
[84], [85], [86]. Moreover, Problem (21) is extended to learn
sparse task relations in [87] via the ℓ1 regularization on Ωwhen
the number of tasks is large. A model similar to problem (21)
is proposed in [88] via a matrix-variate normal prior on W:
W ∼MN(·|0, Ω1, Ω2), where Ω−1
1
and Ω−1
2
are assumed
to be sparse. The MTRL model is extended in [89] to use the
symmetric matrix-variate generalized hyperbolic distribution to
learn block sparse structure in W and in [90] to use the matrix
generalized inverse Gaussian prior to learn low-rank Ω1 and
Ω2. Moreover, the MTRL model is generalized to the multi-
task feature selection problem [37] by learning task relations
via the matrix-variate generalized normal distribution. Since the
prior deﬁned in Eq. (20) implies that WT W follows a Wishart
distribution as W(·|0, Ω), Zhang and Yeung [91] generalize it as
(WT W)t ∼W(·|0, Ω),
(22)
where t is a positive integer to model high-order task relationships.
Eq. (22) can induce a new prior, which is a generalization of the
matrix-variate normal distribution, on W and based on this new
prior, a regularized method is devised to learn high-order task
relations in [91]. The MTRL model has been extended to multi-
output regression [90], [92], [93], [94] by modeling the structure
contained in noises via some matrix-variate priors. For deep neural
networks, the MTRL method has been extended in [95] by placing
a tensor-variate normal distribution as a prior on the parameter
tensor in the fully connected layers.
Different from the aforementioned methods which investigate
the use of global learning models in MTL, Zhang [96] aims
to learn the task relations in local learning methods such as
the k-nearest-neighbor (kNN) classiﬁer by deﬁning the learning
function as a weighted voting of neighbors:
f(xi
j) =
X
(p,q)∈Nk(i,j)
σips(xi
j, xp
q)yp
q,
(23)
where Nk(i, j) denotes the set of task indices and instance indices
for the k nearest neighbors of xi
j, i.e., (p, q) ∈Nk(i, j) meaning

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON KNOWLEDGE AND DATA ENGINEERING
9
that xp
q is one of the k nearest neighbors of xi
j, s(xi
j, xp
q)
deﬁnes the similarity between xi
j and xp
q, and σip represents the
contribution of task Tp to Ti when Tp has some data points to be
neighbors of a data point in Ti. σip can be viewed as the similarity
from Tp to Ti. When σip = 1 for all i and p, Eq. (23) reduces to
the decision function of the kNN classiﬁer for all the tasks. Then
the objective function to learn Σ, which is a m × m matrix with
σip as its (i, p)th entry, can be formulated as
min
Σ
m
X
i=1
1
ni
ni
X
j=1
l(yi
j, f(xi
j)) + λ1
4 ∥Σ −ΣT ∥2
F + λ2
2 ∥Σ∥2
F
s.t.
σii ≥0 ∀i ∈[m], −σii ≤σij ≤σii ∀i̸ = j.
(24)
The ﬁrst regularizer in problem (24) enforces Σ to be nearly
symmetric and the second one is to penalize the complexity of
Σ. The constraints in problem (24) guarantee that the similarity
from one task to itself is positive and also the largest. Similarly,
a multi-task kernel regression is proposed in [96] for regression
tasks.
While the aforementioned methods whose task relations are
symmetric except [96], Lee et al. [97] focus on learning asymmet-
ric task relations. Since different tasks are assumed to be related,
wi can lie in the space spanned by W, i.e., wi ≈Wai, and
hence we have W ≈WA. Here matrix A can be viewed as
asymmetric task relations between pairs of tasks. By assuming
that A is sparse, the objective function is formulated as
min
W,b,A
m
X
i=1
(1 + λ1∥ˆai∥1)
ni
X
j=1
l(yi
j, (wi)T xi
j + bi) + λ2∥W −WA∥2
F
s.t. aij ≥0 ∀i, j ∈[m],
(25)
where ˆai denotes the ith row of A by deleting aii. The term
before the training loss of each task, i.e., 1 + λ1∥ˆai∥1, not only
enforces A to be sparse but also allows asymmetric information
sharing from easier tasks to difﬁcult ones. The regularizer in
problem (25) can make W approach WA with the closeness
depending on λ2. To see the connection between problems
(25) and (21), we rewrite the regularizer in problem (25) as
∥W −WA∥2
F = tr
 W(I −A)(I −A)T WT 
. Based on this
reformulation, the regularizer in problem (25) is a special case of
that in problem (21) by assuming Ω−1 = (I −A)(I −A)T .
Though A is asymmetric, from the perspective of the regularizer,
the task relations here are symmetric and act as the task precision
matrix with a restrictive form.
2.5
Decomposition Approach
The decomposition approach assumes that the parameter matrix
W can be decomposed into two or more component matrices
{Wk}h
k=1 where h ≥2, i.e., W = Ph
k=1 Wk. The objective
functions of most methods in this approach can be uniﬁed as
min
{Wi}∈CW ,b L

h
X
k=1
Wk, b

+
h
X
k=1
gk(Wk),
(26)
where the regularizer is decomposable with respect to Wk’s and
CW denotes a set of constraints for component matrices. To help
understand problem (26), we introduce several instantiations as
follows.
In [98] where h equals 2 and CW = ∅is an empty set, g1(·)
and g2(·) are deﬁned as
g1(W1) = λ1∥W1∥∞,1, g2(W2) = λ2∥W2∥1,
where λ1 and λ2 are positive regularization parameters. Similar
to problem (5), each row of W1 is likely to be a zero row
and hence g1(W1) can help select important features. Due to
the ℓ1 norm regularization, g2(W2) makes W2 sparse. Because
of the characteristics of two regularizers, the parameter matrix
W can eliminate unimportant features for all the tasks when the
corresponding rows in both W1 and W2 are sparse. Moreover,
W2 can identify features for tasks which have their own useful
features that may be outliers for other tasks. Hence this model can
be viewed as a ‘robust’ version of problem (5).
With two component matrices, Chen et al. [99] deﬁne
g2(W2) = λ2∥W2∥1, CW = {W1|∥W1∥S(1) ≤λ1},
(27)
where g1(W1) = 0. Similar to problem (13), CW makes W1
low-rank. With a sparse regularizer g2(W2), W2 makes the entire
model matrix W more robust to outlier tasks in a way similar to
the previous model. When λ2 is large enough, W2 will become
a zero matrix and then problem (27) will act similarly to problem
(13).
gi(·)’s in [100] where CW = ∅are deﬁned as
g1(W1) = λ1∥W1∥S(1),
g2(W2) = λ2∥WT
2 ∥2,1.
(28)
Different from the above two models which assume that W2
is sparse, here g2(W2) enforces W2 to be column-sparse. For
related tasks, their columns in W1 are correlated via the trace
norm regularization and the corresponding columns in W2 are
zero. For outlier tasks which are unrelated to other tasks, the
corresponding columns in W2 can take arbitrary values and hence
model parameters in W for them have no low-rank structure even
though those in W1 may have.
In [101], these functions are deﬁned as
g1(W1) = λ1∥W1∥2,1, g2(W2) = λ2∥WT
2 ∥2,1, CW = ∅.
(29)
Similar to problem (4), g1(W1) makes W1 row-sparse. Here
g2(W2) is identical to that in [100] and it makes W2 column-
sparse. Hence W1 helps select useful features while non-zero
columns in W2 capture outlier tasks.
With h = 2, Zhong and Kwok [102] deﬁne
g1(W1) = λ1c(W1)+λ2∥W1∥2
F , g2(W2) = λ3∥W2∥2
F , CW = ∅,
where c(U) = Pd
i=1
P
k>j |uij −uik| with uij as the (i, j)th
entry in a matrix U. Due to the sparse nature of the ℓ1 norm,
c(W1) enforces corresponding entries in different columns of
W1 to be identical, which is equivalent to clustering tasks in terms
of individual model parameters. Both the squared Frobenius norm
regularizations in g1(W1) and g2(W2) penalize the complexities
of W1 and W2. The use of W2 improves the model ﬂexibility
when not all the tasks exhibit a clear cluster structure.
Different from the aforementioned methods which have only
two component matrices, an arbitrary number of component ma-
trices are considered in [103] with
gk(Wk) = λ

(h −k)∥Wk∥2,1 + (k −1)∥Wk∥1

/(h −1), (30)
where CW = ∅. According to Eq. (30), Wk is assumed to be
both sparse and row-sparse for all k ∈[h]. Based on different
regularization parameters on the regularizer of Wk, we can see
that when k increases, Wk is more likely to be sparse than to
be row-sparse. Even though each Wk is sparse or row-sparse,
the entire parameter matrix W can be non-sparse and hence this
model can discover the latent sparse structure among tasks.
In the above methods, different component matrices have no
direct connection. When there is a dependency among component

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON KNOWLEDGE AND DATA ENGINEERING
10
matrices, problem (26) can model more complex structure among
tasks. For example, Han and Zhang [104] deﬁne
gk(Wk) = λ
X
i>j
∥wi
k −wj
k∥2/ηk−1 ∀k ∈[h]
CW = {{Wk}| |wi
k−1 −wj
k−1| ≥|wi
k −wj
k| ∀k ≥2, ∀i > j},
where wi
k denotes the ith column of Wk. Note that the constraint
set CW relates component matrices and the regularizer gk(Wk)
makes each pair of wi
k and wj
k have a chance to become identical.
Once this happens for some i, j, k, then based on the constraint
set CW , wi
k′ and wj
k′ will always have the same value for k′ ≥k.
This corresponds to sharing all the ancestor nodes for two internal
nodes in a tree and hence this method can learn a hierarchical
structure to characterize task relations. When the constraints are
removed, this method reduces to the multi-level task clustering
method [63], which is a generalization of problem (16).
Another way to relate different component matrices is to use a
non-decomposable regularizer as [105] did, which is slightly dif-
ferent from problem (26) in terms of the regularizer. Speciﬁcally,
given m tasks, there are 2m −1 possible and non-empty task
clusters. All the task clusters can be organized in a tree, where
the root node represents a dummy node, nodes in the second level
represent groups with a single task, and the parent-child relations
are the ‘subset of’ relation. In total, there are h ≡2m component
matrices each of which corresponds to a node in the tree and hence
an index a is used to denote both a level and the corresponding
node in the tree. The objective function is formulated as
min
{Wi},b L
 h
X
k=1
Wk, b
!
+



X
v∈V
λv

X
a∈D(v)
r(Wa)p


1
p



2
s.t. wi
a = 0 ∀i /∈t(a),
(31)
where p takes a value between 1 and 2, D(a) denotes the set of
all the descendants of a, t(a) denotes the set of tasks contained in
node a, wi
a denotes the ith column of Wa, and r(Wa) reﬂects
relations among tasks in node a based on Wa. The regularizer in
problem (31) is used to prune the subtree rooted at each node v
based on the ℓp norm. The constraint in problem (31) implies that
for tasks not contained in a node a, the corresponding columns in
Wa are zero. In [105], r(Wa) adopts the regularizer proposed
in [69] which enforces the parameters of all the tasks to approach
their average.
Different from deep MTL models which are deep in terms
of layers of feature representations, the decomposition approach
can be viewed as a ‘deep’ approach in terms of model param-
eters while most of previous approaches are just shallow ones,
making this approach have more powerful capacity. Moreover, the
decomposition approach can reduce to other approaches such as
the feature learning, low-rank and task clustering approaches when
there is only one component matrix and hence it can be considered
as an improved version of those approaches.
2.6
Comparisons among Different Approaches
Based on the above introduction, we can see that different ap-
proaches exhibit their own characteristics. Speciﬁcally, the feature
learning approach can learn common features, which are generic
and invariant to all the tasks at hand and even new tasks, for all
the tasks. When there exist outlier tasks which are unrelated to
other tasks, the learned features can be inﬂuenced by outlier tasks
signiﬁcantly and they may cause the performance deterioration.
By assuming that the parameter matrix is low-rank, the low-
rank approach can explicitly learn the subspace of the parameter
matrix or implicitly achieve that via some convex or non-convex
regularizer. This approach is powerful but it seems applicable to
only linear models, making nonlinear extensions non-trivial to
be devised. The task clustering approach performs clustering on
the task level in terms of model parameters and it can identify
task clusters each of which consists of similar tasks. A major
limitation of the task clustering approach is that it can capture
positive correlations among tasks in the same cluster but ignore
negative correlations among tasks in different clusters. Moreover,
even though some methods in this category can automatically
determine the number of clusters, most of them still need a
model selection method such as cross validation to determine it,
which may bring additional computational costs. The task relation
learning approach can learn model parameters and pairwise task
relations simultaneously. The learned task relations can give us
insights about the relations between tasks and hence they improve
the interpretability. The decomposition approach can be viewed
as extensions of other parameter-based approaches by equipping
multi-level parameters and hence they can model more complex
task structure, e.g., tree structure. The number of components in
the decomposition approach is important to the performance and
needs to be carefully determined.
2.7
Benchmark Datasets and Performance Comparison
In this section, we introduce some benchmark datasets for MTL
and compare the performance of different MTL models on them.
Some benchmark datasets for MTL are listed as follows.
• School dataset [50]: This dataset is to estimate examination
scores of 15,362 students from 139 secondary schools in
London from 1985 to 1987 where each school is treated as
a task. The input consists of four school-speciﬁc and three
student-speciﬁc attributes.
• SARCOS dataset2: This dataset studies a multi-output prob-
lem of learning the inverse dynamics of 7 SARCOS anthro-
pomorphic robot arms, each of which corresponds to a task,
based on 21 features, including seven joint positions, seven
joint velocities and seven joint accelerations. This dataset
contains 48,933 data points.
• Computer Survey dataset [11]: This dataset is taken from
a survey of 180 persons/tasks who rated the likelihood of
purchasing one of 20 different personal computers, resulting
in 36,000 data points in all the tasks. The features contain
13 different computer characteristics (e.g., price, CPU and
RAM) while the output is an integer rating on the scale 0-10.
• Parkinson dataset [105]: This dataset is to predict the disease
symptom score of Parkinson for patients at different times
using 19 bio-medical features. This dataset has 5,875 data
points for 42 patients, each of whom is treated as a task.
• Sentiment dataset3: This dataset is to classify reviews of four
products/tasks, i.e., books, DVDs, electronics and kitchen
appliances, from Amazon into two classes: positive and
negative reviews. For each task, there are 1,000 positive and
1,000 negative reviews, respectively.
• MHC-I dataset [61]: This databset contains binding afﬁnities
of 15,236 peptides with 35 MHC-I molecules. Each MHC-I
2. http://www.gaussianprocess.org/gpml/data/
3. http://www.cs.jhu.edu/∼mdredze/datasets/sentiment/

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON KNOWLEDGE AND DATA ENGINEERING
11
TABLE 1
The performance comparison of representative MTL models in the ﬁve approaches on benchmark datasets in terms of some evaluation metric.
nMSE stands for ‘normalized mean squared error’, RMSE is for ‘root mean squared error’, and AUC stands for ‘Area Under Curve’. ↑after the
evaluation metric implies that the larger value the better performance and ↓indicates the opposite case.
Dataset (Reference)
Evaluation Metric
STL
Feature Learning
Low-Rank
Task Clustering
Task Relation Learning
Decomposition
[10]
[44]
[61]/ [62]/ [66]/ [67]
[79]/ [86]/ [95]
[98]/ [99]/ [100]/ [105]/ [104]
School ( [104])
nMSE↓
—
0.4393
—
0.4374/-/0.6466/-
—
0.4445/-/-/-/0.4169
SARCOS ( [100])
nMSE↓
0.1821
0.1568
0.1531
—
—
0.1495/0.1456/-/-/-
Computer Survey ( [102])
RMSE↓
2.381
—
—
2.072/-/-/-
2.110/-/-
2.138/2.052/2.074/-/-
Parkinson ( [86])
Explained Variance↑
2.8%
—
—
2.7%/33.6%/-/-
12.0%/27.0%/-
-/-/-/16.8%/-
Sentiment ( [79])
Classiﬁcation Error↓
0.2779
0.2756
—
—
0.2324/-/-
—
MHC-I ( [65])
Classiﬁcation Error↓
0.2010
—
—
0.1890/0.2050/-/-
0.1870/-/-
0.2030/-/0.2070/-/-
Landmine ( [86])
AUC↑
74.6%
—
—
75.9%/76.7%/-/-
76.1%/76.8%/-
-/-/-/76.4%/-
Ofﬁce-Caltech ( [95])
Classiﬁcation Error↓
0.0920
0.0740
—
-/-/-/0.0670
0.0690/-/0.0450
-/-/0.0760/-/-
Ofﬁce-Home ( [95])
Classiﬁcation Error↓
0.3430
0.4170
—
-/-/-/0.3350
0.4070/-/0.3310
-/-/0.4140/-/-
ImageCLEF ( [95])
Classiﬁcation Error↓
0.3640
0.3440
—
-/-/-/0.2780
0.3350/-/0.2470
-/-/0.3510/-/-
molecule is considered as a task and the goal is to predict
whether a peptide binds a molecule.
• Landmine dataset [54]: This dataset consists of 9-dimensional
data points, whose features are extracted from radar images,
from 29 landmine ﬁelds/tasks. Each task is to classify a data
point into two classes (landmine or clutter). There are 14,820
data points in total.
• Ofﬁce-Caltech dataset [106]: The dataset contains data from
10 common categories shared in the Caltech-256 dataset and
the Ofﬁce dataset which consists of images collected from
three distinct domains/tasks: Amazon, Webcam and DSLR,
making this dataset contain 4 tasks. There are 2,533 images
in all the tasks.
• Ofﬁce-Home dataset4: This dataset consists of images from
4 different domains/tasks: artistic images, clip art, product
images and real-world images. Each task contains images of
65 object categories collected in the ofﬁce and home settings.
In total, there are about 15,500 images in all the tasks.
• ImageCLEF dataset5: This dataset contains 12 common cate-
gories shared by four tasks: Caltech-256, ImageNet ILSVRC
2012, Pascal VOC 2012 and Bing. There are about 2,400
images in all the tasks.
In the above benchmark datasets, the ﬁrst four datasets consist
of regression tasks while the other datasets are classiﬁcation tasks,
where each task in the Sentiment, MHC-I and Landmine datasets
is a binary classiﬁcation problem and that in the other three
image datasets is a multi-class classiﬁcation problem. In order to
compare different MTL approaches on those benchmark datasets,
we select some representative MTL methods from each of the ﬁve
approaches introduced in the previous sections and list in Table 1
their performance reported in the MTL literature. We also include
the performance of Single-Task Learning (STL), which trains a
learning model for each task separately, for comparison. It is easy
to see that MTL models perform better than STL counterparts
in most cases, which veriﬁes the effectiveness of MTL. Usually,
different datasets have their own characteristics, making them
more suitable for some MTL approach. For example, according to
the studies in [50], [71], [102], different tasks in the School dataset
are found to be very similar to each other. According to [54],
the Landmine dataset can have two task clusters, where the ﬁrst
cluster consisting of the ﬁrst 15 tasks corresponds to regions that
are relatively highly foliated and the rest tasks belong to another
cluster with regions that are bare earth or deserts. According
to [61], it is well known in the vaccine design community that
some molecules/tasks in the MHC-I dataset can be grouped into
4. http://hemanthdv.org/OfﬁceHome-Dataset
5. http://imageclef.org/2014/adaptation
empirically deﬁned supertypes known to have similar binding be-
haviors. For those three datasets, according to Table 1 we can see
that the task clustering, task relation learning and decomposition
approaches have better performance since they can identify the
cluster structure contained in the data in a plain or hierarchical
way. For other datasets, they do not have so obvious structure
among tasks but some MTL models can learn task correlations,
which can bring more insights for model design and the interpre-
tation of experimental results. For example, the task correlations
in the SARCOS and Sentiment datasets are shown in Tables 2 and
3 of [79], and the task similarities in the Ofﬁce-Caltech dataset
are shown in Figure 3(b) of [95]. Moreover, for image datasets
(i.e., Ofﬁce-Caltech, Ofﬁce-Home and ImageCLEF), deep MTL
models (e.g., [67], [95]) achieve better performance than shallow
models since they can learn powerful feature representations,
while the rest datasets are from diverse areas, making shallow
models perform well on them.
2.8
Another Taxonomy for Regularized MTL Methods
Regularized methods form a main methodology for MTL. Here
we classify many regularized MTL algorithms into two main
categories: learning with feature covariance and learning with task
relations. The former can be viewed as a representative formula-
tion in feature-based MTL, while the latter is for parameter-based
MTL.
Objective functions in the ﬁrst category can be uniﬁed as
min
W,b,Θ L(W, b) + λ
2 tr(WT Θ−1W) + f(Θ),
(32)
where f(·) denotes a regularizer or constraint on Θ. From
the
perspective
of
probabilistic
modeling,
the
regularizer
λ
2 tr(WT Θ−1W) corresponds to a matrix-variate normal dis-
tribution on W as W ∼MN(0, 1
λΘ ⊗I). Based on this
probabilistic prior, Θ models the covariance between the features
since
1
λΘ is the row covariance matrix with each row in W
corresponding to a feature and different tasks share the feature
covariance. All the models in this category differ in the choice of
the function f(·) on Θ. For example, methods in [10], [40], [41]
use f(·) to restrict the trace of Θ as shown in problems (2) and
(12). Moreover, multi-task feature selection methods based on the
ℓ2,1 norm such as [23], [24], [25] can be reformulated as instances
of problem (32).
Different from the ﬁrst category, methods in the second cate-
gory have a uniﬁed objective function as
min
W,b,Σ L(W, b) + λ
2 tr(WΣ−1WT ) + g(Σ),
(33)
where g(·) denotes a regularizer or constraint on Σ. The regu-
larizer λ
2 tr(WΣ−1WT ) corresponds to a matrix-variate normal

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON KNOWLEDGE AND DATA ENGINEERING
12
prior on W as W ∼MN(0, I ⊗1
λΣ), where Σ is to model
the task relations since 1
λΣ is the column covariance with each
column in W corresponding to a task. From this perspective, the
two regularizers for W in problems (32) and (33) have different
meanings even though the formulations seem a bit similar. All
the methods in this category use different functions g(·) to
learn Σ with different functionalities. For example, the methods
in [69], [70], [71], [72], which utilize a priori information on
task relations, directly learn W and b by deﬁning g(Σ) = 0.
Some task clustering methods [61], [65] identify task clusters
by assuming that Σ has a block structure. Several task relation
learning methods including [79], [80], [87], [97], [107] directly
learn Σ as a covariance matrix by constraining its trace or sparsity
in g(Σ). The trace norm regularization [44] can be formulated as
an instance of problem (33).
Even though this taxonomy cannot cover all the regularized
MTL methods, it can bring insights to understand regularized
MTL methods better and help devise more MTL models. For
example, a learning framework is proposed in [108] to learn a
suitable multi-task model for a given multi-task problem under
problem (33) by utilizing Σ to represent the corresponding multi-
task model.
2.9
Other Settings in MTL
Instead of assuming that different tasks share an identical feature
representation, Zhang and Yeung [109] consider a multi-database
face recognition problem where face recognition in a database
is treated as a task. Since different face databases have different
image sizes, here naturally all the tasks do not lie in the same fea-
ture space in this application, leading to a heterogeneous-feature
MTL problem. To tackle this problem, a multi-task discriminant
analysis (MTDA) is proposed in [109] by ﬁrst projecting data
in different tasks into a common subspace and then learning
a common projection in this subspace to discriminate different
classes in different tasks. In [110], a latent probit model is
proposed to generate data of different tasks in different feature
spaces via sparse transformations on a shared latent space and
then to generate labels based on this latent space.
In many MTL classiﬁcation problems, each task is explicitly
or implicitly assumed to be a binary classiﬁcation problem as each
column in the parameter matrix W contains model parameters for
the corresponding task. It is not difﬁcult to see that many methods
in the feature learning approach, low-rank approach and decom-
position approach can be directly extended to a general setting
where each classiﬁcation task can be a multi-class classiﬁcation
problem and correspondingly multiple columns in W contains
model parameters of a multi-class classiﬁcation task. Such direct
extension is applicable since those methods only rely on the entire
W or its rows but not columns as a media to share knowledge
among tasks. However, to the best of our knowledge, there is no
theoretical or empirical study to investigate such direct extension.
For most methods in the task clustering and task relation learning
approaches, such direct extension does not work since for multiple
columns in W corresponding to one task, we do not know which
one(s) can be used to represent this task. Therefore, the direct
extension may not be the best solution to the general setting. In
the following, we introduce four main approaches other than the
direct extension to tackle the general setting in MTL where each
classiﬁcation task can be a multi-class classiﬁcation problem. The
ﬁrst method is to transform the multi-class classiﬁcation problem
in each task into a binary classiﬁcation problem. For example,
multi-task metric learning [70], [111] can do that by treating a
pair of data points from the same class as positive and that from
different classes as negative. The second recipe is to utilize the
characteristics of learners. For example, the linear discriminant
analysis can handle binary and multi-class classiﬁcation problems
in a uniﬁed formulation and hence MTDA [109] can naturally
handle them without changing the formulation. The third approach
is to directly learn label correspondence among different tasks. In
[112], two learning tasks, which share the training data, aim to
maximize the mutual information to identify the correspondence
between labels in different tasks. By assuming that all the tasks
share the same label space, the last approach including [47], [67],
[95] organizes the model parameters of all the tasks in a tensor
where the model parameters of each task form a slice. Then the
parameter tensor can be regularized by tensor trace norms [47]
and a tensor-variate normal prior [95], or factorized as a product
of several low-rank matrices or tensors [67].
Most MTL methods assume that the training data in each task
are stored in a data matrix. In some case, the training data in each
task exhibit a multi-modal structure and hence they are represented
in a tensor instead of a matrix. Multilinear multi-task methods
proposed in [113], [114] can handle this situation by employing
tensor trace norms as a generalization of the trace norm to perform
the regularization.
2.10
Optimization Techniques in MTL
Optimization techniques used in MTL can be categorized into
three main classes as follows.
• Gradient descent method and its variants: The gradient de-
scent method can be used to optimize smooth unconstrained
objective functions possessed by many MTL models. If the
unconstrained objective function is non-smooth, the subgradi-
ent can be used instead and then the gradient descent method
can also be used. When there are some constraints in the
objective function of MTL models [44], [64], the projected
gradient descent method can be used to project the updated
solution in each step to the space deﬁned by constraints.
For deep MTL models, stochastic gradient descent methods
can be used. Moreover, the GradNorm [115] is devised
to normalize gradients to balance the learning of multiple
tasks and [116] proposes the gradient surgery to avoid the
interference between task gradients. Differently, [117] studies
MTL from the perspective of multi-objective optimization by
learning dynamic loss weights.
• Block Coordinate Descent (BCD) method: The parameters
in many MTL models can be divided into several blocks.
For example, parameters in learning functions of all the
tasks form a block and parameters to represent task relations
are from another block. Directly optimizing the objective
function of such a MTL model with respect to parameters
in all blocks together is not easy. The BCD method, which is
also known as the alternating method, is widely used in the
MTL literature, e.g., [10], [12], [31], [40], [41], [61], [62],
[65], [66], [79], [80], [96], [97], to alternatively optimize each
block of parameters while ﬁxing parameters in other blocks.
Hence, each step of the BCD method will solve several
subproblems, each of which is to optimize with respect to
a block of parameters. Compared with the original objective
function, each subproblem is easier to be solved and so the
BCD method can help reduce the optimization complexity.

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON KNOWLEDGE AND DATA ENGINEERING
13
• Proximal method [118]: For a nonsmooth objective function,
which is the sum of smooth and nonsmooth functions, in an
MTL model, the proximal method is frequently used (e.g.,
[24], [27], [63], [99], [100], [101], [102], [103], [104], [119],
[120], [121]) to construct a proximal problem by replacing
the smooth function with a quadratic function that may be
constructed based on its Taylor series in various ways and the
resulting proximal problem is usually easier to be solved than
the original problem. The proximal method can accelerate the
convergence rate of the optimization process or facilitate the
design of distributed optimization algorithms.
3
MTL WITH OTHER LEARNING PARADIGMS
In the previous section, we review different MTL approaches
for supervised learning tasks. In this section, we overview some
works on the combination of MTL with other learning paradigms
in machine learning, including unsupervised learning such as
clustering, semi-supervised learning, active learning, reinforce-
ment learning, multi-view learning and graphical models, to either
improve the performance of supervised MTL further via additional
information such as unlabeled data or use MTL to help improve
the performance of other learning paradigms.
In most applications, labeled data are expensive to collect
but unlabeled data are abundant. So in some MTL applications,
the training dataset of each task consists of both labeled and
unlabeled data, hence we hope to exploit useful information
contained in the unlabeled data to further improve the performance
of supervised learning tasks. In machine learning, semi-supervised
learning and active learning are two ways to utilize unlabeled data
but in different ways. Semi-supervised learning aims to exploit
geometrical information contained in the unlabeled data, while
active learning selects representative unlabeled data to query an
oracle with the hope of increasing the labeling cost as little as
possible. Hence semi-supervised learning and active learning can
be combined with MTL, leading to three new learning paradigms
including semi-supervised multi-task learning [122], [123], [124],
multi-task active learning [125], [126], [127] and semi-supervised
multi-task active learning [128]. Speciﬁcally, a semi-supervised
multi-task classiﬁcation model is proposed in [122], [123] to use
random walk to exploit unlabeled data in each task and then
cluster multiple tasks via a relaxed Dirichlet process. In [124], a
semi-supervised multi-task Gaussian process for regression tasks,
where different tasks are related via the hyperprior on the kernel
parameters in Gaussian processes of all the tasks, is proposed to
incorporate unlabeled data into the design of the kernel function
in each task to achieve the smoothness in the corresponding
functional spaces. Different from these semi-supervised multi-task
methods, multi-task active learning adaptively selects informative
unlabeled data for multi-task learners and hence the selection
criterion is the core research issue. Reichart et al. [125] believe
that data instances to be selected should be as informative as
possible for a set of tasks instead of only one task and hence
they propose two protocols for multi-task active learning. In
[126], the expected error reduction is used as a criterion where
each task is modeled by a supervised latent Dirichlet allocation
model. Inspired by multi-armed bandits which balance the trade-
off between the exploitation and exploration, a selection strategy is
proposed in [127] to consider both the risk of a multi-task learner
based on the trace norm regularization and the corresponding
conﬁdence bound. In [129], the MTRL method (i.e., problem (21))
is extended to the interactive setting where a human expert is
enquired about partial orderings of pairwise task covariances based
an inconsistency criterion. In [130], a proposed generalization
bound is used to select a subset from multiple unlabeled tasks
to acquire labels to improve the generalization performance of
all the tasks. For semi-supervised multi-task active learning, Li
et al. [128] propose a model to use the Fisher information as a
criterion to select unlabeled data to acquire their labels with the
semi-supervised multi-task classiﬁcation model [122], [123] as the
classiﬁer for each task.
MTL achieves the performance improvement in not only
supervised learning tasks but also unsupervised learning tasks
such as clustering. In [131], a multi-task Bregman clustering
method is proposed based on single-task Bregman clustering by
using the earth mover distance to minimize distances between
any pair of tasks in terms of cluster centers and then in [132],
[133], an improved version of [131] and its kernel extension are
proposed to avoid the negative effect caused by the regularizer in
[131] via choosing the better one between single-task and multi-
task Bregman clustering. In [134], a multi-task kernel k-means
method is proposed by learning the kernel matrix via both MMD
between any pair of tasks and the Laplacian regularization that
helps identify a smooth kernel space. In [135], two proposed multi-
task clustering methods are extensions of the MTFL and MTRL
methods by treating labels as cluster indicators to be learned. In
[136], the principle of MTL is incorporated into the subspace
clustering by capturing correlations between data instances. In
[137], a multi-task clustering method belonging to instance-based
MTL is proposed to share data instances among different tasks. In
[138], a multi-task spectral clustering algorithm, which can handle
the out-of-sample issue via a linear function to learn the cluster
assignment, is proposed to achieve the feature selection among
tasks via the ℓ2,1 regularization [139]. [140] proposes to identify
the task cluster structure and learn task relations together.
Reinforcement Learning (RL) is a promising area in machine
learning and has shown superior performance in many applications
such as game playing (e.g., Atari and Go) and robotics. MTL can
help boost the performance of reinforcement learning, leading to
Multi-task Reinforcement Learning (MRL). Some works [141],
[142], [143], [144], [145], [146], [147], [148], [149], [150] adapt
the ideas introduced in Section 2 to MRL. Speciﬁcally, in [141]
where a task solves a sequence of Markov Decision Processes
(MDPs), a hierarchical Bayesian inﬁnite mixture model is used
to model the distribution over MDPs and for each new MDP,
previously learned distributions are used as an informative prior.
In [142], a regionalized policy representation is introduced to
characterize the behavior of an agent in each task and a Dirichlet
process is placed over regionalized policy representations across
multiple tasks to cluster tasks. In [143], a Gaussian process
temporal-difference value function model is used for each task
and a hierarchical Bayesian approach is to model the distribution
over value functions in different tasks. Calandriello et al. [144]
assume that parameter vectors of value functions in different tasks
are jointly sparse and then extend the MTFS method with the ℓ2,1
regularization as well as the MTFL method to learn value func-
tions in multiple tasks together. In [145], a model associating each
subtask with a modular subpolicy is proposed to learn from policy
sketches, which annotate tasks with sequences of named subtasks
and provide information about high-level structural relationships
among tasks. In [146], a multi-task contextual bandit is introduced
to leverage or learn similarities in contexts among arms to improve

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON KNOWLEDGE AND DATA ENGINEERING
14
the prediction of rewards from contexts. In [147], a multi-task
linearly solvable MDP, whose task basis matrix contains a library
of component tasks shared by all the tasks, is proposed to maintain
a parallel distributed representation of tasks each of which enables
an agent to draw on macro actions simultaneously. In [148], a
multi-task deep RL model based on the attention can automatically
group tasks into sub-networks on a state-level granularity. In
[149], a sharing experience framework is introduced to use task-
speciﬁc rewards to identify similar parts deﬁned as shared-regions
which can guide the experience sharing of task policies. In [150],
multi-task soft option learning, a hierarchical framework based on
planning as inference, is regularized by a shared prior to avoid
training instabilities and allow the ﬁne-tuning of options for new
tasks without forgetting learned policies. The idea of compression
and distillation have been incorporated into MRL as in [151],
[152], [153], [154]. For example, in [151], the proposed Actor-
Mimic method combines both deep reinforcement learning and
model compression techniques to train a policy network which can
learn to act for multiple tasks. In [152], a policy distillation method
is proposed to not only train an efﬁcient network to learn the policy
of an agent but also consolidate multiple task-speciﬁc policies into
a single policy. In [153], the problem of multi-task multi-agent
reinforcement learning under the partial observability is addressed
by distilling decentralized single-task policies into a uniﬁed policy
across multiple tasks. In [154], each task has its own policy which
is constrained to be close to a shared policy that is trained by the
distillation. Some works [155], [156], [157], [158], [159], [160]
in MRL focus on online and distributed settings. Speciﬁcally, in
[155], a distributed MRL framework is devised to model it as an
instance of general consensus and an efﬁcient decentralized solver
is developed. In [156], [157], multiple goal-directed tasks are
learned in an online setup without the need for expert supervision
by actively sampling harder tasks. In [158], a distributed agent
is developed to not only use resources more efﬁciently in single-
machine training but also scale to thousands of machines without
sacriﬁcing data efﬁciency or resource utilization. [159] formulates
MRL from a perspective of variational inference and it proposes
a novel distributed solver with quadratic convergence guarantees.
In [160], an online learning algorithm is proposed to dynami-
cally combine different auxiliary tasks which provide gradient
directions to speed up the training of the main reinforcement
learning task. Some works study the theoretical foundation of
MRL. For example, in [161], sharing representations among tasks
is analyzed with theoretical guarantees to highlight conditions
to share representations and ﬁnite-time bounds of approximated
value-iteration are extended to the multi-task setting. Moreover,
there are some works to design novel MRL methods. For example,
in [162], a MRL framework is proposed to train agent to employ
hierarchical policies that decide when to use a previously learned
policy and when to learn a new skill with a temporal grammar
that helps the agent learn complex temporal dependencies. [163]
studies the problem of parallel learning of multiple sequential-
decision tasks and proposes to automatically adapt the contribution
of each task to the updates of the agent to make all tasks have
comparable impacts on the learning dynamics. In [164], a self-
supervised representation learning algorithm is proposed for multi-
task deep RL to capture structured information about environment
dynamics based on multi-step predictive representations of future
observations.
Multi-view learning assumes that each data point is associated
with multiple sets of features where each set corresponds to a view
and it usually exploits information contained in multiple views for
supervised or semi-supervised learning tasks. Multi-task multi-
view learning extends multi-view learning to the MTL setting
where each task is a multi-view learning problem. Speciﬁcally,
in [165], a graph-based method is proposed for multi-task multi-
view classiﬁcation problems. In a task, each view is enforced to
be consistent with both other views and labels, while different
tasks are expected to have similar predictions on views they share,
making views as a bridge to construct the task relatedness. In
[166], both a regularized MTL method [71] and the MTRL method
are applied to each view of different tasks and different views
in a task are expected to achieve an agreement on unlabeled
data. Different from [165], [166] which study the multi-task
multi-view classiﬁcation problem, in [167], [168], two multi-task
multi-view clustering methods are proposed and both methods
consider three factors: within-view-task clustering which conducts
clustering on each view in a task, view relation learning which
minimizes the disagreement among views in a task, and low-
rank structure learning which aims to learn a shared subspace
for different tasks under a common view. The difference between
these two methods is that the ﬁrst method uses a bipartite graph co-
clustering method for nonnegative data while the other one adopts
a semi-nonnegative matrix tri-factorization to cluster general data.
In [169], a multi-label multi-view algorithm is proposed to not
only learn common features via the ℓ2,1 regularization but also
identify useless views via the Frobenius norm. In multi-task multi-
view learning, each task is usually supplied with both labeled and
unlabeled data, hence this paradigm can also be viewed as another
way to utilize unlabeled information for MTL. A deep multi-task
multi-view model is proposed in [170] to fuse all the views based
on the cross-stitch network.
MTL can help learn more accurate structure in graphical
models. In [171], an algorithm is proposed to learn Bayes network
structures by assuming that different networks/tasks share similar
structures via a common prior and then a heuristic search is used
to ﬁnd structures with high scores for all the tasks. With a similar
idea, multiple Gaussian graphical models are jointly learned in
[172] by assuming joint sparsity among precision matrices via
the ℓ∞,1 norm regularization. In [173], some domain knowledge
about task relations is incorporated into the learning of multiple
Bayesian networks. By viewing the feature interaction matrix as
a form of graphical models to model pairwise relations between
features, two models are proposed in [174] to learn a quadratical
function, where the feature interaction matrix deﬁnes the quadratic
term, for each task based on the ℓ2,1 and tensor trace norm
regularization, respectively.
According to the above discussions, we can see that most
research works discussed in this section follow the spirits of MTL
approaches introduced in Section 2 and adapt to their own settings.
4
HANDLING BIG DATA
When the number of tasks is large, the total number of training
data in all the tasks can be very big and hence a ‘big’ aspect in
MTL denotes the number of tasks. In this case, we can either
devise online, parallel, or distributed MTL models to accelerate
the learning process. Another ‘big’ aspect in MTL lies in the
data dimensionality which can be very high. In this situation,
we can speedup the learning via feature selection, dimensionality
reduction and feature hashing to reduce the dimension without

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON KNOWLEDGE AND DATA ENGINEERING
15
losing too much useful information. In this section, we review
some relevant works.
When the number of tasks is very big, we can devise some
parallel MTL methods to speedup the learning process on multi-
CPU or multi-GPU devices. As a representative formulation in
feature-based MTL, problem (32) is easy to parallelize since when
given the feature covariance matrix Θ, the learning of different
tasks can be decoupled. However, for problem (33) in parameter-
based MTL, the situation is totally different since even given the
task covariance matrix Σ, different tasks are still coupled, making
the direct parallelization fail. In order to parallelize problem (33),
Zhang [175] uses the FISTA algorithm to design a surrogate func-
tion for problem (33) with a given Σ, where the surrogate function
is decomposable with respect to tasks, leading to a parallel design
for MTL based on different loss functions including the hinge,
ϵ-insensitive and square losses.
Online multi-task learning is also capable of handling a big
number of tasks. In [176], [177], under a setting where all the
tasks contribute toward a common goal, the relation between
tasks is measured via a global loss function and several online
algorithms are proposed to use absolute norms as the global
loss function. In [178], online MTL algorithms are devised by
modeling the task relatedness via hard constraints that the m-
tuple of actions for tasks satisﬁes. In [179], perceptron-based
online algorithms are proposed for multi-task binary classiﬁcation
problems where task similarities are measured based on either the
geometric closeness of the task reference vectors or the dimension
of their spanned subspace. In [180], a recursive Bayesian online
algorithm based on Gaussian processes is devised to update both
estimations and conﬁdence intervals when data instances arrive
sequentially. In [181], an online version of the MTRL method is
proposed to update both the model parameters and task covariance
in a sequential way. An online multi-task learning algorithm is
proposed in [182] to jointly learn the per-task model and the task
relations by smoothing the loss function of each task w.r.t. a task
distribution and adaptively reﬁning this distribution over time. In
[183], an online multi-task model is proposed to learn both a low-
rank component and a group sparse component to characterize
task relations. In [184], a multi-task passive-aggressive method
is proposed to learn multiple relative similarity learning tasks,
each of which is to learn a similarity function from data with
relative constraints. In [185], a Gaussian distribution, whose mean
or covariance consists of a local component for each task and a
global component shared by all the tasks, over each task is used
as a conﬁdence measure to guide the online MTL process.
Training data can locate at different devices, making the design
of distributed MTL models important. In [186], a communication-
efﬁcient distributed MTL algorithm, where each machine learns
a task, based on the debiased Lasso is proposed to learn jointly
sparse features in a high-dimensional space. In [187], the MTRL
method (i.e., problem (21)) is extended to the distributed setting
based on a stochastic dual coordinate ascent method. In [188],
to protect the privacy of data, a privacy-preserving distributed
MTL method is proposed based on a privacy-preserving proximal
gradient algorithm with asynchronous updates. In [189], federated
multi-task learning is proposed as an extension of distributed
multi-task learning to consider both stragglers and fault tolerance.
In [190], a distributed multi-task algorithm is proposed under the
online MTL setting.
For high-dimensional data in MTL, we can use multi-task fea-
ture selection methods to reduce the dimension or extend single-
task dimension reduction techniques to the multi-task setting as
did in [109]. Another option is to use the feature hashing and in
[191], multiple hashing functions are proposed to accelerate the
joint learning of multiple tasks.
5
APPLICATIONS
MTL has many applications in various areas including computer
vision, bioinformatics, health informatics, speech, NLP, web, and
so on. In Table 2, we categorize different MTL problems in
each application area according to MTL approaches they used,
where the classiﬁcation of MTL approaches has been already
introduced in Section 2. In the last column of Table 2, we list
some problems in various application areas which are different
from other columns. For application problems listed in Table
2, application-dependent MTL models have been proposed to
solve them.6 Though these models are different from each other,
there are some characteristics in respective areas. For example, in
computer vision, deep MTL models, most of which belong to the
feature transformation approach, exhibit good performance, mak-
ing this approach popular in computer vision. In bioinformatics
and health informatics, the interpretability of learning models is
more important in some sense. Therefore, the feature selection
and task relation learning approaches are widely used in this area
as the former approach can identify useful features and the latter
one can quantitatively show task relations. In speech and NLP, the
data exhibit a sequential structure, which makes recurrent-neural-
network-based deep MTL models in the feature transformation
approach play an important role. As the data in web applications
is of a large scale, this area favors simple models such as linear
models or their ensembles based on boosting. Among all the MTL
approaches, the feature transformation, feature selection and task
relation learning approaches are among the most widely used MTL
approaches in different application areas according to Table 2.
When encountering a new application problem which can be
modeled as a MTL problem, we need to judge whether tasks in
this problem are related in terms of either low-level features or
high-level concepts. If so, by treating Table 2 as a look-up table.
we can identify a problem in Table 2 similar to the new problem
and then adapt the corresponding MTL model to solve the new
problem. Otherwise, we can try popular MTL approaches in the
respective area.
6
THEORETICAL ANALYSES
As well as designing MTL models and exploiting MTL applica-
tions, there are some works to study theoretical aspects of MTL
and here we review them.
The generalization bound, which is to upper-bound the gen-
eralization loss in terms of the training loss, model complexity
and conﬁdence, is core in learning theory since it can identify
the learnability and induce the sample complexity. There are
several works [40], [49], [249], [250], [251], [252], [253], [254],
[255], [256], [257], [258], [259], [260] to study the generalization
bound of different MTL models. In Table 3, we compare those
works in terms of the analyzed MTL model, analysis tool and
the convergence rate of the corresponding bound which is based
on the number of tasks (i.e., m) and the average number of data
points per task (i.e., n0). According to Table 3, we can see that
some works (i.e., [49], [249], [250], [253], [254], [257], [258])
6. For details of those models, refer to an arXiv version [248] of this paper.

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON KNOWLEDGE AND DATA ENGINEERING
16
TABLE 2
The classiﬁcation of works about MTL applications in different areas according to different MTL approaches.
Approach
Computer Vision
Bioinformatics &
Speech & NLP
Web
Miscellaneous
Health Informatics
Feature Transformation
Visual tracking [192], [193]
Protein subcellular location prediction [194]
Speech synthesis [195], [196]
Learning to rank [197]
Stock prediction [198]
Action recognition [199]
Protein interaction prediction [200]
Speech recognition [201], [202]
Localization [203]
Facial landmark detection [15]
Biological image classiﬁcation [17]
Jointly learning of NLP tasks [204]
Scene classiﬁcation [205]
Dialog state tracking [18]
Attribute prediction [206]
Machine translation [207]
Image rotation [208]
Syntactic parsing [207]
Immediacy prediction [209]
Pose estimation [19]
Thumbnail selection [16]
Face veriﬁcation [210]
Feature Selection
Face and object recognition [211]
siRNA efﬁcacy prediction [212]
Microblog analysis [119]
Behavioral targeting [213]
Brain imaging [214]
Genetic marker detection [215]
Mental state examination [216]
Predict cognitive outcome [217]
Survival analysis [120]
Genetic trait prediction [218]
Gene expression association [219]
Low-Rank
Image segmentation [220]
Identiﬁcation of longitudinal
Climate prediction [221]
Saliency detection [222]
phenotypic markers [223]
Task Clustering
Image segmentation [224]
Brain-computer interfaces [225]
Age estimation [226]
Personalized medical
Facial action unit
treatment [227]
prediction [228]
Genetic trait prediction [218]
Action recognition [229]
Task Relation Learning
Protein subcellular location prediction [194]
Sentiment classiﬁcation [230]
Web search ranking [231]
Localization [203]
Organism modeling [232]
Collaborative ﬁltering [233]
Robotics [234], [235]
MHC-I binding prediction [236]
Display advertising [237]
Trajectory regression [238]
Splice-site prediction [236]
Trafﬁc sign recognition [239]
Prioritization of disease genes [240]
Soil moisture forecasts [241]
Protein interaction prediction [242]
Identifying antigenic variants [243]
Decomposition
Multi-view tracking [244]
Genetic trait prediction [218]
Pose estimation [245]
Protein interaction prediction [246]
Person re-identiﬁcation [247]
analyze different MTL models based on various analysis tools
and the best convergence rate is O(
1
√mn0 ). Though MTL models
analyzed in [12], [40], [251], [259] are not the same, those MTL
models exhibit similar objectives to learn a linear or nonlinear
feature transformation shared by all the tasks, and the convergence
rates are O(
1
√mn0 ) except [12]. The trace norm regularization
(i.e., Problem (13)) is analyzed in [255], [256], [258], [260],
among which [260] has the best convergence rate based on the
local Rademacher complexity. A related MTL model based on
the Schatten norm regularization is analyzed in [252] with an
O(
1
√mn0 ) convergence rate. For the graph regularization [69],
[71] analyzed in [252], [260], the local Rademacher complexity
leads to a better convergence rate (i.e., O(
1
(mn0)α ) for some
constant α ∈(0.5, 1)) and a similar observation holds for problem
(4). In a word, various analysis tools can be used to analyze MTL
models and among them, the local Rademacher complexity can
derive tighter generalization bounds than others.
Besides generalization bounds, there are some works to study
other theoretical problems in MTL. For example, Argyriou et
al. [261], [262] discuss conditions where representer theorems
hold for regularized MTL algorithms. Several studies [263], [264],
[265] investigate conditions to well recover true features for multi-
task feature selection models.
TABLE 3
Comparison of generalization bounds derived in different works in
terms of the analyzed MTL model, analysis tool and the convergence
rate of the bound. m denotes the number of tasks and n0 denotes the
average number of data points per task.
MTL Model
Reference
Analysis Tool
Convergence rate
Tasks from an environment
[249], [250]
VC dimension & Covering number
O(1/√mn0)
Task distributions can be transformed
[254]
VC dimension
O(1/√mn0)
Task clustering
[49]
VC dimension
O(m ln(n0/m)/n0)
Multi-task kernel classiﬁer
[257]
Covering number
O(1/√mn0)
Problem (26) with Eq. (27)
[258]
Multi-task stability
O(m√m/n0)
Multi-task data compression
[253]
Kolmogorov complexity
O(1/√mn0)
Problem (10)
[40]
Covering number
O(1/√mn0)
Problem (10) without U
[251]
Rademacher complexity
O(1/√mn0)
Problem (3)
[12]
Rademacher complexity
O(1/√n0)
Learn a common feature transformation
[259]
Gaussian average
O(1/√mn0)
Problem (13)
[258]
Multi-task stability
O(m/n0)
[255]
Rademacher complexity
O(ln(m)/√n0)
[256]
Rademacher complexity
O(max(
p
ln(mn0)/mn0, 1/√n0))
[260]
Local Rademacher complexity
O(1/(mn0)α), 0.5 < α < 1
Schatten-norm-regularized MTL models
[252]
Rademacher complexity
O(1/√mn0)
Graph regularizers [69], [71]
[252]
Rademacher complexity
O(1/√mn0)
[260]
Local Rademacher complexity
O(1/(mn0)α), 0.5 < α < 1
Problem (4)
[255]
Rademacher complexity
O(1/√n0)
[260]
Local Rademacher complexity
O(1/(mn0)α), 0.5 < α < 1
7
CONCLUSIONS AND DISCUSSIONS
In this paper, we survey different aspects of MTL. First, after
giving the deﬁnition of MTL, we give a classiﬁcation of supervised
MTL models into ﬁve main approaches and discuss their charac-
teristics. Then we review the combinations of MTL with other
learning paradigms. The online, parallel and distributed MTL
models as well as dimensionality reduction and feature hashing
are discussed to speedup the learning process. The applications of
MTL in various areas are introduced to show the usefulness of
MTL and theoretical aspects of MTL are discussed.
In future studies, there are several issues to be addressed.
Firstly, outlier tasks, which are unrelated to other tasks, are well
known to hamper the performance of all the tasks when learning
them jointly. There are some methods to alleviate negative effects
that outlier tasks bring. However, there lacks principled ways and
theoretical analyses to study the resulting negative effects. In order
to make MTL safe to be used by human, this is an important issue
and needs more studies.
Secondly, deep learning has become a dominant approach in
many areas and several multi-task deep models belonging to the
feature transformation, low-rank, task clustering and task relation
learning approaches have been proposed as reviewed in Sections
2, 3 and 5. As discussed, most of them only share hidden layers.
This approach is powerful when all the tasks are related, but it
is vulnerable to noisy and outlier tasks that can deteriorate the
performance dramatically. We believe that it is desirable to design
ﬂexible and robust deep multi-task models.
Lastly, existing studies mainly focus on supervised learning
tasks, and only a few ones are on other tasks such as unsupervised
learning, semi-supervised learning, active learning, multi-view
learning and reinforcement learning tasks. It is natural to adapt
or extend the ﬁve approaches introduced in Section 2 to those
non-supervised learning tasks. We think that such adaptation
and extension require more efforts to design appropriate models.
Moreover, it is worth trying to apply MTL to other areas in
artiﬁcial intelligence such as logic and planning to broaden its
application scopes.
Acknowledgments This work is supported by NSFC 62076118.

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON KNOWLEDGE AND DATA ENGINEERING
17
REFERENCES
[1]
R. Caruana, “Multitask learning,” MLJ, 1997.
[2]
Q. Yang, Y. Zhang, W. Dai, and S. J. Pan, Transfer Learning. Cambridge
University Press, 2020.
[3]
M.-L. Zhang and Z.-H. Zhou, “A review on multi-label learning algo-
rithms,” IEEE TKDE, 2014.
[4]
G. I. Parisi, R. Kemker, J. L. Part, C. Kanan, and S. Wermter, “Continual
lifelong learning with neural networks: A review,” Neural Networks,
vol. 113, pp. 54–71, 2019.
[5]
Y. Zhang and Q. Yang, “An overview of multi-task learning,” National
Science Review, 2018.
[6]
X. Yang, S. Kim, and E. P. Xing, “Heterogeneous multitask learning
with joint sparsity constraints,” in NIPS, 2009.
[7]
S. Bickel, J. Bogojeska, T. Lengauer, and T. Scheffer, “Multi-task
learning for HIV therapy screening,” in ICML, 2008.
[8]
X. Liao and L. Carin, “Radial basis function network for multi-task
learning,” in NIPS, 2005.
[9]
D. L. Silver, R. Poirier, and D. Currie, “Inductive transfer with context-
sensitive neural networks,” MLJ, 2008.
[10]
A. Argyriou, T. Evgeniou, and M. Pontil, “Convex multi-task feature
learning,” MLJ, 2008.
[11]
A. Argyriou, C. A. Micchelli, M. Pontil, and Y. Ying, “A spectral
regularization framework for multi-task structure learning,” in NIPS,
2007.
[12]
A. Maurer, M. Pontil, and B. Romera-Paredes, “Sparse coding for
multitask and transfer learning,” in ICML, 2013.
[13]
J. Zhu, N. Chen, and E. P. Xing, “Inﬁnite latent SVM for classiﬁcation
and multi-task learning,” in NIPS, 2011.
[14]
M. K. Titsias and M. L´azaro-Gredilla, “Spike and slab variational
inference for multi-task and multiple kernel learning,” in NIPS, 2011.
[15]
Z. Zhang, P. Luo, C. C. Loy, and X. Tang, “Facial landmark detection
by deep multi-task learning,” in ECCV, 2014.
[16]
W. Liu, T. Mei, Y. Zhang, C. Che, and J. Luo, “Multi-task deep visual-
semantic embedding for video thumbnail selection,” in CVPR, 2015.
[17]
W. Zhang, R. Li, T. Zeng, Q. Sun, S. Kumar, J. Ye, and S. Ji, “Deep
model based transfer and multi-task learning for biological image
analysis,” in KDD, 2015.
[18]
N. Mrksic, D. ´O. S´eaghdha, B. Thomson, M. Gasic, P. Su, D. Vandyke,
T. Wen, and S. J. Young, “Multi-domain dialog state tracking using
recurrent neural networks,” in ACL, 2015.
[19]
S. Li, Z. Liu, and A. B. Chan, “Heterogeneous multi-task learning for
human pose estimation with deep convolutional neural network,” IJCV,
2015.
[20]
Y. Shinohara, “Adversarial multi-task learning of deep neural networks
for robust speech recognition,” in Interspeech, 2016.
[21]
P. Liu, X. Qiu, and X. Huang, “Adversarial multi-task learning for text
classiﬁcation,” in ACL, 2017.
[22]
I. Misra, A. Shrivastava, A. Gupta, and M. Hebert, “Cross-stitch
networks for multi-task learning,” in CVPR, 2016.
[23]
G. Obozinski, B. Taskar, and M. Jordan, “Multi-task feature selection,”
tech. rep., University of California, Berkeley, 2006.
[24]
J. Liu, S. Ji, and J. Ye, “Multi-task feature learning via efﬁcient l2,1-
norm minimization,” in UAI, 2009.
[25]
S. Lee, J. Zhu, and E. P. Xing, “Adaptive multi-task lasso: With
application to eQTL detection,” in NIPS, 2010.
[26]
N. S. Rao, C. R. Cox, R. D. Nowak, and T. T. Rogers, “Sparse
overlapping sets lasso for multitask learning and its application to fMRI
analysis,” in NIPS, 2013.
[27]
P. Gong, J. Zhou, W. Fan, and J. Ye, “Efﬁcient multi-task feature
learning with calibration,” in KDD, 2014.
[28]
J. Wang and J. Ye, “Safe screening for multi-task feature learning with
multiple data matrices,” in ICML, 2015.
[29]
H. Liu, M. Palatucci, and J. Zhang, “Blockwise coordinate descent
procedures for the multi-task lasso, with applications to neural semantic
basis discovery,” in ICML, 2009.
[30]
P. Gong, J. Ye, and C. Zhang, “Multi-stage multi-task feature learning,”
JMLR, 2013.
[31]
A. C. Lozano and G. Swirszcz, “Multi-level lasso for sparse multi-task
regression,” in ICML, 2012.
[32]
X. Wang, J. Bi, S. Yu, and J. Sun, “On multiplicative multitask feature
learning,” in NIPS, 2014.
[33]
L. Han, Y. Zhang, G. Song, and K. Xie, “Encoding tree sparsity in
multi-task learning: A probabilistic framework,” in AAAI, 2014.
[34]
T. Jebara, “Multi-task feature and kernel selection for SVMs,” in ICML,
2004.
[35]
S. Kim and E. P. Xing, “Tree-guided group lasso for multi-task regres-
sion with structured sparsity,” in ICML, 2010.
[36]
Y. Zhou, R. Jin, and S. C. H. Hoi, “Exclusive lasso for multi-task feature
selection,” in AISTATS, 2010.
[37]
Y. Zhang, D.-Y. Yeung, and Q. Xu, “Probabilistic multi-task feature
selection,” in NIPS, 2010.
[38]
D. Hern´andez-Lobato and J. M. Hern´andez-Lobato, “Learning feature
selection dependencies in multi-task learning,” in NIPS, 2013.
[39]
D. Hern´andez-Lobato, J. M. Hern´andez-Lobato, and Z. Ghahramani,
“A probabilistic model for dirty multi-task feature selection,” in ICML,
2015.
[40]
R. K. Ando and T. Zhang, “A framework for learning predictive
structures from multiple tasks and unlabeled data,” JMLR, 2005.
[41]
J. Chen, L. Tang, J. Liu, and J. Ye, “A convex formulation for learning
shared structures from multiple tasks,” in ICML, 2009.
[42]
A. Agarwal, H. Daum´e III, and S. Gerber, “Learning multiple tasks
using manifold regularization,” in NIPS, 2010.
[43]
J. Zhang, Z. Ghahramani, and Y. Yang, “Learning multiple related tasks
using latent independent component analysis,” in NIPS, 2005.
[44]
T. K. Pong, P. Tseng, S. Ji, and J. Ye, “Trace norm regularization:
Reformulations, algorithms, and multi-task learning,” SIAM Journal on
Optimization, 2010.
[45]
L. Han and Y. Zhang, “Multi-stage multi-task learning with reduced
rank,” in AAAI, 2016.
[46]
A. M. McDonald, M. Pontil, and D. Stamos, “Spectral k-support norm
regularization,” in NIPS, 2014.
[47]
Y. Yang and T. M. Hospedales, “Trace norm regularised deep multi-task
learning,” in ICLR, Workshop Track, 2017.
[48]
S. Thrun and J. O’Sullivan, “Discovering structure in multiple learning
tasks: The TC algorithm,” in ICML, 1996.
[49]
K. Crammer and Y. Mansour, “Learning multiple tasks using shared
hypotheses,” in NIPS, 2012.
[50]
B. Bakker and T. Heskes, “Task clustering and gating for Bayesian
multitask learning,” JMLR, 2003.
[51]
K. Yu, V. Tresp, and A. Schwaighofer, “Learning Gaussian processes
from multiple tasks,” in ICML, 2005.
[52]
S. Yu, V. Tresp, and K. Yu, “Robust multi-task learning with t-
processes,” in ICML, 2007.
[53]
W. Lian, R. Henao, V. Rao, J. E. Lucas, and L. Carin, “A multitask point
process predictive model,” in ICML, 2015.
[54]
Y. Xue, X. Liao, L. Carin, and B. Krishnapuram, “Multi-task learning
for classiﬁcation with Dirichlet process priors,” JMLR, 2007.
[55]
Y. Xue, D. B. Dunson, and L. Carin, “The matrix stick-breaking process
for ﬂexible multi-task learning,” in ICML, 2007.
[56]
H. Li, X. Liao, and L. Carin, “Nonparametric Bayesian feature selection
for multi-task learning,” in ICASSP, 2011.
[57]
Y. Qi, D. Liu, D. B. Dunson, and L. Carin, “Multi-task compressive
sensing with Dirichlet process priors,” in ICML, 2008.
[58]
K. Ni, L. Carin, and D. B. Dunson, “Multi-task learning for sequential
data via iHMMs and the nested Dirichlet process,” in ICML, 2007.
[59]
K. Ni, J. W. Paisley, L. Carin, and D. B. Dunson, “Multi-task learning
for analyzing and sorting large databases of sequential data,” IEEE TSP,
2008.
[60]
A. Passos, P. Rai, J. Wainer, and H. Daum´e III, “Flexible modeling of
latent task structures in multitask learning,” in ICML, 2012.
[61]
L. Jacob, F. R. Bach, and J.-P. Vert, “Clustered multi-task learning: A
convex formulation,” in NIPS, 2008.
[62]
Z. Kang, K. Grauman, and F. Sha, “Learning with whom to share in
multi-task feature learning,” in ICML, 2011.
[63]
L. Han and Y. Zhang, “Learning multi-level task groups in multi-task
learning,” in AAAI, 2015.
[64]
A. Barzilai and K. Crammer, “Convex multi-task learning by cluster-
ing,” in AISTATS, 2015.
[65]
Q. Zhou and Q. Zhao, “Flexible clustered multi-task learning by
learning representative tasks,” IEEE TPAMI, 2016.
[66]
A. Kumar and H. Daum´e III, “Learning task grouping and overlap in
multi-task learning,” in ICML, 2012.
[67]
Y. Yang and T. M. Hospedales, “Deep multi-task representation learn-
ing: A tensor factorisation approach,” in ICLR, 2017.
[68]
J. Zhou, J. Chen, and J. Ye, “Clustered multi-task learning via alternat-
ing structure optimization,” in NIPS, 2011.
[69]
T. Evgeniou and M. Pontil, “Regularized multi-task learning,” in KDD,
2004.
[70]
S. Parameswaran and K. Q. Weinberger, “Large margin multi-task
metric learning,” in NIPS, 2010.
[71]
T. Evgeniou, C. A. Micchelli, and M. Pontil, “Learning multiple tasks
with kernel methods,” JMLR, 2005.
[72]
T. Kato, H. Kashima, M. Sugiyama, and K. Asai, “Multi-task learning
via conic programming,” in NIPS, 2007.

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON KNOWLEDGE AND DATA ENGINEERING
18
[73]
S. Feldman, M. R. Gupta, and B. A. Frigyik, “Revisiting Stein’s
paradox: Multi-task averaging,” JMLR, 2014.
[74]
I. Yamane, H. Sasaki, and M. Sugiyama, “Regularized multitask
learning for multidimensional log-density gradient estimation,” Neural
Computation, 2016.
[75]
N. G¨ornitz, C. Widmer, G. Zeller, A. Kahles, S. Sonnenburg, and
G. R¨atsch, “Hierarchical multitask structured output learning for large-
scale sequence segmentation,” in NIPS, 2011.
[76]
E. V. Bonilla, K. M. A. Chai, and C. K. I. Williams, “Multi-task
Gaussian process prediction,” in NIPS, 2007.
[77]
K. M. A. Chai, “Generalization errors and learning curves for regression
with multi-task Gaussian processes,” in NIPS, 2009.
[78]
Y. Zhang and D.-Y. Yeung, “Multi-task learning using generalized t
process,” in AISTATS, 2010.
[79]
Y. Zhang and D.-Y. Yeung, “A convex formulation for learning task
relationships in multi-task learning,” in UAI, 2010.
[80]
Y. Zhang and D.-Y. Yeung, “A regularization approach to learning task
relationships in multitask learning,” ACM TKDD, 2014.
[81]
Y. Zhang and D.-Y. Yeung, “Multi-task boosting by exploiting task
relationships,” in ECMLPKDD, 2012.
[82]
Y. Zhang and D.-Y. Yeung, “Multilabel relationship learning,” ACM
TKDD, 2013.
[83]
F. Dinuzzo, C. S. Ong, P. V. Gehler, and G. Pillonetto, “Learning output
kernels with block coordinate descent,” in ICML, 2011.
[84]
C. Ciliberto, Y. Mroueh, T. A. Poggio, and L. Rosasco, “Convex
learning of multiple tasks and their structure,” in ICML, 2015.
[85]
C. Ciliberto, L. Rosasco, and S. Villa, “Learning multiple visual tasks
while discovering their structure,” in CVPR, 2015.
[86]
P. Jawanpuria, M. Lapin, M. Hein, and B. Schiele, “Efﬁcient output
kernel learning for multiple tasks,” in NIPS, 2015.
[87]
Y. Zhang and Q. Yang, “Learning sparse task relations in multi-task
learning,” in AAAI, 2017.
[88]
Y. Zhang and J. G. Schneider, “Learning multiple tasks with a sparse
matrix-normal penalty,” in NIPS, 2010.
[89]
C. Archambeau, S. Guo, and O. Zoeter, “Sparse Bayesian multi-task
learning,” in NIPS, 2011.
[90]
M. Yang, Y. Li, and Z. Zhang, “Multi-task learning with Gaussian
matrix generalized inverse Gaussian model,” in ICML, 2013.
[91]
Y. Zhang and D.-Y. Yeung, “Learning high-order task relationships in
multi-task learning,” in IJCAI, 2013.
[92]
P. Rai, A. Kumar, and H. Daum´e III, “Simultaneously leveraging output
and task structures for multiple-output regression,” in NIPS, 2012.
[93]
B. Rakitsch, C. Lippert, K. M. Borgwardt, and O. Stegle, “It is all in the
noise: Efﬁcient multi-task Gaussian process inference with structured
residuals,” in NIPS, 2013.
[94]
A. R. Goncalves, F. J. V. Zuben, and A. Banerjee, “Multi-task sparse
structure learning with Gaussian copula models,” JMLR, 2016.
[95]
M. Long, Z. Cao, J. Wang, and P. S. Yu, “Learning multiple tasks with
multilinear relationship networks,” in NIPS, 2017.
[96]
Y. Zhang, “Heterogeneous-neighborhood-based multi-task local learn-
ing algorithms,” in NIPS, 2013.
[97]
G. Lee, E. Yang, and S. J. Hwang, “Asymmetric multi-task learning
based on task relatedness and loss,” in ICML, 2016.
[98]
A. Jalali, P. Ravikumar, S. Sanghavi, and C. Ruan, “A dirty model for
multi-task learning,” in NIPS, 2010.
[99]
J. Chen, J. Liu, and J. Ye, “Learning incoherent sparse and low-rank
patterns from multiple tasks,” in KDD, 2010.
[100] J. Chen, J. Zhou, and J. Ye, “Integrating low-rank and group-sparse
structures for robust multi-task learning,” in KDD, 2011.
[101] P. Gong, J. Ye, and C. Zhang, “Robust multi-task feature learning,” in
KDD, 2012.
[102] W. Zhong and J. T. Kwok, “Convex multitask learning with ﬂexible task
clusters,” in ICML, 2012.
[103] A. Zweig and D. Weinshall, “Hierarchical regularization cascade for
joint learning,” in ICML, 2013.
[104] L. Han and Y. Zhang, “Learning tree structure in multi-task learning,”
in KDD, 2015.
[105] P. Jawanpuria and J. S. Nath, “A convex feature learning formulation
for latent task structure discovery,” in ICML, 2012.
[106] B. Gong, Y. Shi, F. Sha, and K. Grauman, “Geodesic ﬂow kernel for
unsupervised domain adaptation,” in CVPR, 2012.
[107] M. Solnon, S. Arlot, and F. R. Bach, “Multi-task regression using
minimal penalties,” JMLR, 2012.
[108] Y. Zhang, Y. Wei, and Q. Yang, “Learning to multitask,” in NIPS, 2018.
[109] Y. Zhang and D.-Y. Yeung, “Multi-task learning in heterogeneous
feature spaces,” in AAAI, 2011.
[110] S. Han, X. Liao, and L. Carin, “Cross-domain multitask learning with
latent probit models,” in ICML, 2012.
[111] P. Yang, K. Huang, and C. Liu, “Geometry preserving multi-task metric
learning,” MLJ, 2013.
[112] N. Quadrianto, A. J. Smola, T. S. Caetano, S. V. N. Vishwanathan,
and J. Petterson, “Multitask learning without label correspondences,” in
NIPS, 2010.
[113] B. Romera-Paredes, H. Aung, N. Bianchi-Berthouze, and M. Pontil,
“Multilinear multitask learning,” in ICML, 2013.
[114] K. Wimalawarne, M. Sugiyama, and R. Tomioka, “Multitask learning
meets tensor factorization: Task imputation via convex optimization,” in
NIPS, 2014.
[115] O. Sener and V. Koltun, “Multi-task learning as multi-objective opti-
mization,” in NeurIPS, 2018.
[116] T. Yu, S. Kumar, A. Gupta, S. Levine, K. Hausman, and C. Finn,
“Gradient surgery for multi-task learning,” in NeurIPS, 2020.
[117] Z. Chen, V. Badrinarayanan, C. Lee, and A. Rabinovich, “Gradnorm:
Gradient normalization for adaptive loss balancing in deep multitask
networks,” in ICML, 2018.
[118] N. Parikh and S. P. Boyd, “Proximal algorithms,” Foundations and
Trends in Optimization, vol. 1, no. 3, pp. 127–239, 2014.
[119] L. Zhao, Q. Sun, J. Ye, F. Chen, C. Lu, and N. Ramakrishnan, “Multi-
task learning for spatio-temporal event forecasting,” in KDD, 2015.
[120] Y. Li, J. Wang, J. Ye, and C. K. Reddy, “A multi-task learning
formulation for survival analysis,” in KDD, 2016.
[121] L. Zhao, Q. Sun, J. Ye, F. Chen, C. Lu, and N. Ramakrishnan, “Feature
constrained multi-task learning models for spatiotemporal event fore-
casting,” IEEE TKDE, 2017.
[122] Q. Liu, X. Liao, and L. Carin, “Semi-supervised multitask learning,” in
NIPS, 2007.
[123] Q. Liu, X. Liao, H. Li, J. R. Stack, and L. Carin, “Semisupervised
multitask learning,” IEEE TPAMI, 2009.
[124] Y. Zhang and D. Yeung, “Semi-supervised multi-task regression,” in
ECMLPKDD, 2009.
[125] R. Reichart, K. Tomanek, U. Hahn, and A. Rappoport, “Multi-task
active learning for linguistic annotations,” in ACL, 2008.
[126] A. Acharya, R. J. Mooney, and J. Ghosh, “Active multitask learning
using both latent and supervised shared topics,” in SDM, 2014.
[127] M. Fang and D. Tao, “Active multi-task learning via bandits,” in SDM,
2015.
[128] H. Li, X. Liao, and L. Carin, “Active learning for semi-supervised multi-
task learning,” in ICASSP, 2009.
[129] K. Lin and J. Zhou, “Interactive multi-task relationship learning,” in
ICDM, 2016.
[130] A. Pentina and C. H. Lampert, “Multi-task learning with labeled and
unlabeled tasks,” in ICML, 2017.
[131] J. Zhang and C. Zhang, “Multitask Bregman clustering,” in AAAI, 2010.
[132] X. Zhang and X. Zhang, “Smart multi-task Bregman clustering and
multi-task kernel clustering,” in AAAI, 2013.
[133] X. Zhang, X. Zhang, and H. Liu, “Smart multitask Bregman clustering
and multitask kernel clustering,” ACM TKDD, 2015.
[134] Q. Gu, Z. Li, and J. Han, “Learning a kernel for multi-task clustering,”
in AAAI, 2011.
[135] X. Zhang, “Convex discriminative multitask clustering,” IEEE TPAMI,
2015.
[136] Y. Wang, D. P. Wipf, Q. Ling, W. Chen, and I. J. Wassell, “Multi-task
learning for subspace segmentation,” in ICML, 2015.
[137] X. Zhang, X. Zhang, and H. Liu, “Self-adapted multi-task clustering,”
in IJCAI, 2016.
[138] Y. Yang, Z. Ma, Y. Yang, F. Nie, and H. T. Shen, “Multitask spectral
clustering by exploring intertask correlation,” IEEE TCYB, 2015.
[139] X. Zhu, X. Li, S. Zhang, C. Ju, and X. Wu, “Robust joint graph sparse
coding for unsupervised spectral feature selection,” IEEE TNNLS, 2017.
[140] X. Zhang, X. Zhang, H. Liu, and J. Luo, “Multi-task clustering with
model relation learning,” in IJCAI, 2018.
[141] A. Wilson, A. Fern, S. Ray, and P. Tadepalli, “Multi-task reinforcement
learning: A hierarchical Bayesian approach,” in ICML, 2007.
[142] H. Li, X. Liao, and L. Carin, “Multi-task reinforcement learning in
partially observable stochastic environments,” JMLR, 2009.
[143] A. Lazaric and M. Ghavamzadeh, “Bayesian multi-task reinforcement
learning,” in ICML, 2010.
[144] D. Calandriello, A. Lazaric, and M. Restelli, “Sparse multi-task rein-
forcement learning,” in NIPS, 2014.
[145] J. Andreas, D. Klein, and S. Levine, “Modular multitask reinforcement
learning with policy sketches,” in ICML, 2017.
[146] A. A. Deshmukh, ¨U. Dogan, and C. Scott, “Multi-task learning for
contextual bandits,” in NIPS, 2017.

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON KNOWLEDGE AND DATA ENGINEERING
19
[147] A. M. Saxe, A. C. Earle, and B. Rosman, “Hierarchy through composi-
tion with multitask LMDPs,” in ICML, 2017.
[148] T. Br¨am, G. Brunner, O. Richter, and R. Wattenhofer, “Attentive multi-
task deep reinforcement learning,” in ECMLPKDD, 2019.
[149] T. Vuong, D. V. Nguyen, T. Nguyen, C. Bui, H. Kieu, V. Ta, Q. Tran,
and T. H. Le, “Sharing experience in multitask reinforcement learning,”
in IJCAI, 2019.
[150] M. Igl, A. Gambardella, N. Nardelli, N. Siddharth, W. B¨ohmer, and
S. Whiteson, “Multitask soft option learning,” in UAI, 2020.
[151] E. Parisotto, J. Ba, and R. Salakhutdinov, “Actor-mimic: Deep multitask
and transfer reinforcement learning,” in ICLR, 2016.
[152] A. A. Rusu, S. G. Colmenarejo, C¸ . G¨ulc¸ehre, G. Desjardins, J. Kirk-
patrick, R. Pascanu, V. Mnih, K. Kavukcuoglu, and R. Hadsell, “Policy
distillation,” in ICLR, 2016.
[153] S. Omidshaﬁei, J. Pazis, C. Amato, J. P. How, and J. Vian, “Deep de-
centralized multi-task multi-agent reinforcement learning under partial
observability,” in ICML, 2017.
[154] Y. W. Teh, V. Bapst, W. M. Czarnecki, J. Quan, J. Kirkpatrick, R. Had-
sell, N. Heess, and R. Pascanu, “Distral: Robust multitask reinforcement
learning,” in NIPS, 2017.
[155] S. E. Bsat, H. Bou-Ammar, and M. E. Taylor, “Scalable multitask policy
gradient reinforcement learning,” in AAAI, 2017.
[156] S. Sharma and B. Ravindran, “Online multi-task learning using active
sampling,” in ICLR Workshop, 2017.
[157] S. Sharma, A. K. Jha, P. Hegde, and B. Ravindran, “Learning to multi-
task by active sampling,” in ICLR, 2018.
[158] L. Espeholt, H. Soyer, R. Munos, K. Simonyan, V. Mnih, T. Ward,
Y.
Doron,
V.
Firoiu,
T.
Harley,
I.
Dunning,
S.
Legg,
and
K. Kavukcuoglu, “IMPALA: scalable distributed deep-RL with impor-
tance weighted actor-learner architectures,” in ICML, 2018.
[159] R. Tutunov, D. Kim, and H. Bou-Ammar, “Distributed multitask rein-
forcement learning with quadratic convergence,” in NeurIPS, 2018.
[160] X. Lin, H. S. Baweja, G. Kantor, and D. Held, “Adaptive auxiliary task
weighting for reinforcement learning,” in NeurIPS, 2019.
[161] C. D’Eramo, D. Tateo, A. Bonarini, M. Restelli, and J. Peters, “Sharing
knowledge in multi-task deep reinforcement learning,” in ICLR, 2020.
[162] T. Shu, C. Xiong, and R. Socher, “Hierarchical and interpretable skill
acquisition in multi-task reinforcement learning,” in ICLR, 2018.
[163] M. Hessel, H. Soyer, L. Espeholt, W. Czarnecki, S. Schmitt, and
H. van Hasselt, “Multi-task deep reinforcement learning with PopArt,”
in AAAI, 2019.
[164] Z. Guo, B. A. Pires, M. G. Azar, B. Piot, F. Altch´e, J.-B. Grill, and
R. Munos, “Bootstrap latent-predictive representations for multitask
reinforcement learning,” in ICML, 2020.
[165] J. He and R. Lawrence, “A graph-based framework for multi-task multi-
view learning,” in ICML, 2011.
[166] J. Zhang and J. Huan, “Inductive multi-task learning with multiple view
data,” in KDD, 2012.
[167] X. Zhang, X. Zhang, and H. Liu, “Multi-task multi-view clustering for
non-negative data,” in IJCAI, 2015.
[168] X. Zhang, X. Zhang, H. Liu, and X. Liu, “Multi-task multi-view
clustering,” IEEE TKDE, 2016.
[169] X. Zhu, X. Li, and S. Zhang, “Block-row sparse multiview multilabel
learning for image classiﬁcation,” IEEE TCYB, 2016.
[170] L. Zheng, Y. Cheng, and J. He, “Deep multimodality model for multi-
task multi-view learning,” in SDM, 2019.
[171] A. Niculescu-Mizil and R. Caruana, “Inductive transfer for Bayesian
network structure learning,” in AISTATS, 2007.
[172] J. Honorio and D. Samaras, “Multi-task learning of Gaussian graphical
models,” in ICML, 2010.
[173] D. Oyen and T. Lane, “Leveraging domain knowledge in multitask
Bayesian network structure learning,” in AAAI, 2012.
[174] K. Lin, J. Xu, I. M. Baytas, S. Ji, and J. Zhou, “Multi-task feature
interaction learning,” in KDD, 2016.
[175] Y. Zhang, “Parallel multi-task learning,” in ICDM, 2015.
[176] O. Dekel, P. M. Long, and Y. Singer, “Online multitask learning,” in
COLT, 2006.
[177] O. Dekel, P. M. Long, and Y. Singer, “Online learning of multiple tasks
with a shared loss,” JMLR, 2007.
[178] G. Lugosi, O. Papaspiliopoulos, and G. Stoltz, “Online multi-task
learning with hard constraints,” in COLT, 2009.
[179] G. Cavallanti, N. Cesa-Bianchi, and C. Gentile, “Linear algorithms for
online multitask classiﬁcation,” JMLR, 2010.
[180] G. Pillonetto, F. Dinuzzo, and G. D. Nicolao, “Bayesian online multitask
learning of Gaussian processes,” IEEE TPAMI, 2010.
[181] A. Saha, P. Rai, H. Daum´e III, and S. Venkatasubramanian, “Online
learning of multiple tasks and their relationships,” in AISTATS, 2011.
[182] K. Murugesan, H. Liu, J. G. Carbonell, and Y. Yang, “Adaptive
smoothed online multi-task learning,” in NIPS, 2016.
[183] P. Yang, P. Zhao, and X. Gao, “Robust online multi-task learning with
correlative and personalized structures,” IEEE TKDE, 2017.
[184] S. Hao, P. Zhao, Y. Liu, S. C. H. Hoi, and C. Miao, “Online multitask
relative similarity learning,” in IJCAI, 2017.
[185] P. Yang, P. Zhao, J. Zhou, and X. Gao, “Conﬁdence weighted multitask
learning,” in AAAI, 2019.
[186] J. Wang, M. Kolar, and N. Srebro, “Distributed multi-task learning,” in
AISTATS, 2016.
[187] S. Liu, S. J. Pan, and Q. Ho, “Distributed multi-task relationship
learning,” in KDD, 2017.
[188] L. Xie, I. M. Baytas, K. Lin, and J. Zhou, “Privacy-preserving dis-
tributed multi-task learning with asynchronous updates,” in KDD, 2017.
[189] V. Smith, C. Chiang, M. Sanjabi, and A. S. Talwalkar, “Federated multi-
task learning,” in NIPS, 2017.
[190] C. Zhang, P. Zhao, S. Hao, Y. C. Soh, B. Lee, C. Miao, and S. C. H. Hoi,
“Distributed multi-task classiﬁcation: A decentralized online learning
approach,” MLJ, 2018.
[191] K. Q. Weinberger, A. Dasgupta, J. Langford, A. J. Smola, and J. At-
tenberg, “Feature hashing for large scale multitask learning,” in ICML,
2009.
[192] T. Zhang, B. Ghanem, S. Liu, and N. Ahuja, “Robust visual tracking
via multi-task sparse learning,” in CVPR, 2012.
[193] T. Zhang, B. Ghanem, S. Liu, and N. Ahuja, “Robust visual tracking
via structured multi-task sparse learning,” IJCV, 2013.
[194] Q. Xu, S. J. Pan, H. H. Xue, and Q. Yang, “Multitask learning for
protein subcellular location prediction,” IEEE/ACM TCBB, 2011.
[195] Z. Wu, C. Valentini-Botinhao, O. Watts, and S. King, “Deep neural
networks employing multi-task learning and stacked bottleneck features
for speech synthesis,” in ICASSP, 2015.
[196] Q. Hu, Z. Wu, K. Richmond, J. Yamagishi, Y. Stylianou, and R. Maia,
“Fusion of multiple parameterisations for DNN-based sinusoidal speech
synthesis with multi-task learning,” in InterSpeech, 2015.
[197] J. Bai, K. Zhou, G. Xue, H. Zha, G. Sun, B. L. Tseng, Z. Zheng, and
Y. Chang, “Multi-task learning for learning to rank in web search,” in
CIKM, 2009.
[198] J. Ghosn and Y. Bengio, “Multi-task learning for stock selection,” in
NIPS, 1996.
[199] C. Yuan, W. Hu, G. Tian, S. Yang, and H. Wang, “Multi-task sparse
learning with Beta process prior for action recognition,” in CVPR, 2013.
[200] Y. Qi, O. Tastan, J. G. Carbonell, J. Klein-Seetharaman, and J. We-
ston, “Semi-supervised multi-task learning for predicting interactions
between HIV-1 and human proteins,” Bioinformatics, 2010.
[201] P. Bell and S. Renals, “Regularization of context-dependent deep neural
networks with context-independent multi-task training,” in ICASSP,
2015.
[202] Z. Chen, S. Watanabe, H. Erdogan, and J. R. Hershey, “Speech en-
hancement and recognition using multi-task learning of long short-term
memory recurrent neural networks,” in InterSpeech, 2015.
[203] V. W. Zheng, S. J. Pan, Q. Yang, and J. J. Pan, “Transferring multi-
device localization models using latent multi-task learning,” in AAAI,
2008.
[204] R. Collobert and J. Weston, “A uniﬁed architecture for natural language
processing: Deep neural networks with multitask learning,” in ICML,
2008.
[205] M. Lapin, B. Schiele, and M. Hein, “Scalable multitask representation
learning for scene classiﬁcation,” in CVPR, 2014.
[206] A. H. Abdulnabi, G. Wang, J. Lu, and K. Jia, “Multi-task CNN model
for attribute prediction,” IEEE TMM, 2015.
[207] M. Luong, Q. V. Le, I. Sutskever, O. Vinyals, and L. Kaiser, “Multi-task
sequence to sequence learning,” in ICLR, 2016.
[208] J. Yim, H. Jung, B. Yoo, C. Choi, D. Park, and J. Kim, “Rotating your
face using multi-task deep neural network,” in CVPR, 2015.
[209] X. Chu, W. Ouyang, W. Yang, and X. Wang, “Multi-task recurrent
neural network for immediacy prediction,” in ICCV, 2015.
[210] X. Wang, C. Zhang, and Z. Zhang, “Boosted multi-task learning for
face veriﬁcation with applications to web image and video search,” in
CVPR, 2009.
[211] X. Yuan and S. Yan, “Visual classiﬁcation with multi-task joint sparse
representation,” in CVPR, 2010.
[212] Q. Liu, Q. Xu, V. W. Zheng, H. Xue, Z. Cao, and Q. Yang, “Multi-
task learning for cross-platform siRNA efﬁcacy prediction: An in-silico
study,” BMC Bioinformatics, 2010.
[213] A. Ahmed, M. Aly, A. Das, A. J. Smola, and T. Anastasakos, “Web-
scale multi-task feature selection for behavioral targeting,” in CIKM,
2012.

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON KNOWLEDGE AND DATA ENGINEERING
20
[214] H. Wang, F. Nie, H. Huang, S. L. Risacher, C. H. Q. Ding, A. J. Saykin,
and L. Shen, “Sparse multi-task regression and feature selection to
identify brain imaging predictors for memory performance,” in ICCV,
2011.
[215] K. Puniyani, S. Kim, and E. P. Xing, “Multi-population GWA mapping
via multi-task regularized regression,” Bioinformatics, 2010.
[216] J. Zhou, L. Yuan, J. Liu, and J. Ye, “A multi-task learning formulation
for predicting disease progression,” in KDD, 2011.
[217] J. Wan, Z. Zhang, J. Yan, T. Li, B. D. Rao, S. Fang, S. Kim, S. L.
Risacher, A. J. Saykin, and L. Shen, “Sparse Bayesian multi-task
learning for predicting cognitive outcomes from neuroimaging measures
in Alzheimer’s disease,” in CVPR, 2012.
[218] D. He, D. Kuhn, and L. Parida, “Novel applications of multitask learn-
ing and multiple output regression to multiple genetic trait prediction,”
Bioinformatics, 2016.
[219] K. Zhang, J. W. Gray, and B. Parvin, “Sparse multitask regression
for identifying common mechanism of response to therapeutic targets,”
Bioinformatics, 2010.
[220] B. Cheng, G. Liu, J. Wang, Z. Huang, and S. Yan, “Multi-task low-rank
afﬁnity pursuit for image segmentation,” in ICCV, 2011.
[221] J. Xu, P. Tan, L. Luo, and J. Zhou, “GSpartan: a geospatio-temporal
multi-task learning framework for multi-location prediction,” in SDM,
2016.
[222] C. Lang, G. Liu, J. Yu, and S. Yan, “Saliency detection by multitask
sparsity pursuit,” IEEE TIP, 2012.
[223] H. Wang, F. Nie, H. Huang, J. Yan, S. Kim, S. L. Risacher, A. J.
Saykin, and L. Shen, “High-order multi-task feature learning to identify
longitudinal phenotypic markers for Alzheimer’s disease progression
prediction,” in NIPS, 2012.
[224] Q. An, C. Wang, I. Shterev, E. Wang, L. Carin, and D. B. Dunson, “Hi-
erarchical kernel stick-breaking process for multi-task image analysis,”
in ICML, 2008.
[225] M. Alamgir, M. Grosse-Wentrup, and Y. Altun, “Multitask learning for
brain-computer interfaces,” in AISTATS, 2010.
[226] Y. Zhang and D.-Y. Yeung, “Multi-task warped Gaussian process for
personalized age estimation,” in CVPR, 2010.
[227] J. Xu, J. Zhou, and P. Tan, “FORMULA: FactORized MUlti-task
LeArning for task discovery in personalized medical models,” in SDM,
2015.
[228] T. R. Almaev, B. Mart´ınez, and M. F. Valstar, “Learning to transfer:
Transferring latent task structures and its application to person-speciﬁc
facial action unit detection,” in ICCV, 2015.
[229] A. Liu, Y. Su, W. Nie, and M. S. Kankanhalli, “Hierarchical clustering
multi-task learning for joint human action grouping and recognition,”
IEEE TPAMI, 2017.
[230] F. Wu and Y. Huang, “Collaborative multi-domain sentiment classiﬁca-
tion,” in ICDM, 2015.
[231] O. Chapelle, P. K. Shivaswamy, S. Vadrevu, K. Q. Weinberger,
Y. Zhang, and B. L. Tseng, “Multi-task learning for boosting with
application to web search ranking,” in KDD, 2010.
[232] C. Widmer, J. Leiva, Y. Altun, and G. R¨atsch, “Leveraging sequence
classiﬁcation by taxonomy-based multitask learning,” in RECOMB,
2010.
[233] Y. Zhang, B. Cao, and D.-Y. Yeung, “Multi-domain collaborative
ﬁltering,” in UAI, 2010.
[234] K. M. A. Chai, C. K. I. Williams, S. Klanke, and S. Vijayakumar,
“Multi-task Gaussian process learning of robot inverse dynamics,” in
NIPS, 2008.
[235] D.-Y. Yeung and Y. Zhang, “Learning inverse dynamics by Gaussian
process regression under the multi-task learning framework,” in The
Path to Autonomous Robots, Springer, 2009.
[236] C. Widmer, N. C. Toussaint, Y. Altun, and G. R¨atsch, “Inferring latent
task structure for multitask learning by multiple kernel learning,” BMC
Bioinformatics, 2010.
[237] A. Ahmed, A. Das, and A. J. Smola, “Scalable hierarchical multitask
learning algorithms for conversion optimization in display advertising,”
in WSDM, 2014.
[238] J. Zheng and L. M. Ni, “Time-dependent trajectory regression on road
networks via multi-task learning,” in AAAI, 2013.
[239] X. Lu, Y. Wang, X. Zhou, Z. Zhang, and Z. Ling, “Trafﬁc sign recog-
nition via multi-modal tree-structure embedded multi-task learning,”
IEEE TITS, 2017.
[240] F. Mordelet and J. Vert, “ProDiGe: Prioritization of disease genes with
multitask machine learning from positive and unlabeled examples,”
BMC Bioinformatics, 2011.
[241] J. Xu, P. Tan, J. Zhou, and L. Luo, “Online multi-task learning
framework for ensemble forecasting,” IEEE TKDE, 2017.
[242] M. Kshirsagar, J. G. Carbonell, and J. Klein-Seetharaman, “Multitask
learning for host-pathogen protein interactions,” Bioinformatics, 2013.
[243] L. Han, L. Li, F. Wen, L. Zhong, T. Zhang, and X. Wan, “Graph-guided
multi-task sparse learning model: a method for identifying antigenic
variants of inﬂuenza A(H3N2) virus,” Bioinformatics, 2019.
[244] Z. Hong, X. Mei, D. V. Prokhorov, and D. Tao, “Tracking via robust
multi-task multi-view joint sparse representation,” in ICCV, 2013.
[245] Y. Yan, E. Ricci, S. Ramanathan, O. Lanz, and N. Sebe, “No matter
where you are: Flexible graph-guided multi-task learning for multi-view
head pose classiﬁcation under target motion,” in ICCV, 2013.
[246] M. Kshirsagar, K. Murugesan, J. G. Carbonell, and J. Klein-
Seetharaman, “Multitask matrix completion for learning protein inter-
actions across diseases,” Journal of Computational Biology, 2017.
[247] C. Su, F. Yang, S. Zhang, Q. Tian, L. S. Davis, and W. Gao, “Multi-task
learning with low rank attribute embedding for person re-identiﬁcation,”
in ICCV, 2015.
[248] Y. Zhang and Q. Yang, “A survey on multi-task learning,” CoRR, 2017.
[249] J. Baxter, “Learning internal representations,” in COLT, 1995.
[250] J. Baxter, “A model of inductive bias learning,” JAIR, 2000.
[251] A. Maurer, “Bounds for linear multi-task learning,” JMLR, 2006.
[252] A. Maurer, “The Rademacher complexity of linear transformation
classes,” in COLT, 2006.
[253] B. Juba, “Estimating relatedness via data compression,” in ICML, 2006.
[254] S. Ben-David and R. S. Borbely, “A notion of task relatedness yielding
provable multiple-task learning guarantees,” MLJ, 2008.
[255] S. M. Kakade, S. Shalev-Shwartz, and A. Tewari, “Regularization
techniques for learning with matrices,” JMLR, 2012.
[256] M. Pontil and A. Maurer, “Excess risk bounds for multitask learning
with trace norm regularization,” in COLT, 2013.
[257] A. Pentina and S. Ben-David, “Multi-task and lifelong learning of
kernels,” in ALT, 2015.
[258] Y. Zhang, “Multi-task learning and algorithmic stability,” in AAAI, 2015.
[259] A. Maurer, M. Pontil, and B. Romera-Paredes, “The beneﬁt of multitask
representation learning,” JMLR, 2016.
[260] N. Youseﬁ, Y. Lei, M. Kloft, M. Mollaghasemi, and G. Anag-
nastapolous, “Local Rademacher complexity-based learning guarantees
for multi-task learning,” JMLR, 2018.
[261] A. Argyriou, C. A. Micchelli, and M. Pontil, “When is there a represen-
ter theorem? vector versus matrix regularizers,” JMLR, 2009.
[262] A. Argyriou, C. A. Micchelli, and M. Pontil, “On spectral learning,”
JMLR, 2010.
[263] K. Lounici, M. Pontil, A. B. Tsybakov, and S. A. van de Geer, “Taking
advantage of sparsity in multi-task learning,” in COLT, 2009.
[264] G. Obozinski, M. J. Wainwright, and M. I. Jordan, “Support union
recovery in high-dimensional multivariate regression,” Annals of Statis-
tics, 2011.
[265] M. Kolar, J. D. Lafferty, and L. A. Wasserman, “Union support recovery
in multi-task learning,” JMLR, 2011.
