Variational Inference with Normalizing Flows
Danilo Jimenez Rezende
DANILOR@GOOGLE.COM
Shakir Mohamed
SHAKIR@GOOGLE.COM
Google DeepMind, London
Abstract
The choice of approximate posterior distribution
is one of the core problems in variational infer-
ence. Most applications of variational inference
employ simple families of posterior approxima-
tions in order to allow for efﬁcient inference, fo-
cusing on mean-ﬁeld or other simple structured
approximations.
This restriction has a signiﬁ-
cant impact on the quality of inferences made
using variational methods. We introduce a new
approach for specifying ﬂexible, arbitrarily com-
plex and scalable approximate posterior distribu-
tions. Our approximations are distributions con-
structed through a normalizing ﬂow, whereby a
simple initial density is transformed into a more
complex one by applying a sequence of invertible
transformations until a desired level of complex-
ity is attained. We use this view of normalizing
ﬂows to develop categories of ﬁnite and inﬁnites-
imal ﬂows and provide a uniﬁed view of ap-
proaches for constructing rich posterior approxi-
mations. We demonstrate that the theoretical ad-
vantages of having posteriors that better match
the true posterior, combined with the scalability
of amortized variational approaches, provides a
clear improvement in performance and applica-
bility of variational inference.
1. Introduction
There has been a great deal of renewed interest in varia-
tional inference as a means of scaling probabilistic mod-
eling to increasingly complex problems on increasingly
larger data sets. Variational inference now lies at the core of
large-scale topic models of text (Hoffman et al., 2013), pro-
vides the state-of-the-art in semi-supervised classiﬁcation
(Kingma et al., 2014), drives the models that currently pro-
duce the most realistic generative models of images (Gre-
gor et al., 2014; 2015; Rezende et al., 2014; Kingma &
Welling, 2014), and are a default tool for the understanding
Proceedings of the 32 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Lille, France, 2015. JMLR: W&CP volume 37. Copy-
right 2015 by the author(s).
of many physical and chemical systems. Despite these suc-
cesses and ongoing advances, there are a number of disad-
vantages of variational methods that limit their power and
hamper their wider adoption as a default method for statis-
tical inference. It is one of these limitations, the choice of
posterior approximation, that we address in this paper.
Variational inference requires that intractable posterior dis-
tributions be approximated by a class of known probability
distributions, over which we search for the best approxima-
tion to the true posterior. The class of approximations used
is often limited, e.g., mean-ﬁeld approximations, implying
that no solution is ever able to resemble the true posterior
distribution. This is a widely raised objection to variational
methods, in that unlike other inferential methods such as
MCMC, even in the asymptotic regime we are unable re-
cover the true posterior distribution.
There is much evidence that richer, more faithful posterior
approximations do result in better performance. For exam-
ple, when compared to sigmoid belief networks that make
use of mean-ﬁeld approximations, deep auto-regressive
networks use a posterior approximation with an auto-
regressive dependency structure that provides a clear im-
provement in performance (Mnih & Gregor, 2014). There
is also a large body of evidence that describes the detri-
mental effect of limited posterior approximations. Turner
& Sahani (2011) provide an exposition of two commonly
experienced problems.
The ﬁrst is the widely-observed
problem of under-estimation of the variance of the poste-
rior distribution, which can result in poor predictions and
unreliable decisions based on the chosen posterior approx-
imation. The second is that the limited capacity of the pos-
terior approximation can also result in biases in the MAP
estimates of any model parameters (and this is the case e.g.,
in time-series models).
A number of proposals for rich posterior approximations
have been explored, typically based on structured mean-
ﬁeld approximations that incorporate some basic form of
dependency within the approximate posterior. Another po-
tentially powerful alternative would be to specify the ap-
proximate posterior as a mixture model, such as those de-
veloped by Jaakkola & Jordan (1998); Jordan et al. (1999);
Gershman et al. (2012). But the mixture approach limits
arXiv:1505.05770v6  [stat.ML]  14 Jun 2016

Variational Inference with Normalizing Flows
the potential scalability of variational inference since it re-
quires evaluation of the log-likelihood and its gradients for
each mixture component per parameter update, which is
typically computationally expensive.
This paper presents a new approach for specifying approx-
imate posterior distributions for variational inference. We
begin by reviewing the current best practice for inference
in general directed graphical models, based on amortized
variational inference and efﬁcient Monte Carlo gradient es-
timation, in section 2. We then make the following contri-
butions:
• We propose the speciﬁcation of approximate poste-
rior distributions using normalizing ﬂows, a tool for
constructing complex distributions by transforming a
probability density through a series of invertible map-
pings (sect. 3). Inference with normalizing ﬂows pro-
vides a tighter, modiﬁed variational lower bound with
additional terms that only add terms with linear time
complexity (sect 4).
• We show that normalizing ﬂows admit inﬁnitesimal
ﬂows that allow us to specify a class of posterior ap-
proximations that in the asymptotic regime is able to
recover the true posterior distribution, overcoming one
oft-quoted limitation of variational inference.
• We present a uniﬁed view of related approaches for
improved posterior approximation as the application
of special types of normalizing ﬂows (sect 5).
• We show experimentally that the use of general nor-
malizing ﬂows systematically outperforms other com-
peting approaches for posterior approximation.
2. Amortized Variational Inference
To perform inference it is sufﬁcient to reason using the
marginal likelihood of a probabilistic model, and requires
the marginalization of any missing or latent variables in
the model.
This integration is typically intractable, and
instead, we optimize a lower bound on the marginal like-
lihood. Consider a general probabilistic model with ob-
servations x, latent variables z over which we must inte-
grate, and model parameters θ. We introduce an approxi-
mate posterior distribution for the latent variables qφ(z|x)
and follow the variational principle (Jordan et al., 1999) to
obtain a bound on the marginal likelihood:
log pθ(x) = log
Z
pθ(x|z)p(z)dz
(1)
= log
Z qφ(z|x)
qφ(z|x)pθ(x|z)p(z)dz
(2)
≥−IDKL[qφ(z|x)∥p(z)]+Eq[log pθ(x|z)]=−F(x),
(3)
where we used Jensen’s inequality to obtain the ﬁnal equa-
tion, pθ(x|z) is a likelihood function and p(z) is a prior
over the latent variables. We can easily extend this for-
mulation to posterior inference over the parameters θ, but
we will focus on inference over the latent variables only.
This bound is often referred to as the negative free energy
F or as the evidence lower bound (ELBO). It consists of
two terms: the ﬁrst is the KL divergence between the ap-
proximate posterior and the prior distribution (which acts
as a regularizer), and the second is a reconstruction error.
This bound (3) provides a uniﬁed objective function for op-
timization of both the parameters θ and φ of the model and
variational approximation, respectively.
Current best practice in variational inference performs
this optimization using mini-batches and stochastic gra-
dient descent, which is what allows variational infer-
ence to be scaled to problems with very large data
sets.
There are two problems that must be addressed
to successfully use the variational approach:
1) efﬁ-
cient computation of the derivatives of the expected log-
likelihood ∇φEqφ(z)[log pθ(x|z)], and 2) choosing the
richest, computationally-feasible approximate posterior
distribution q(·). The second problem is the focus of this
paper. To address the ﬁrst problem, we make use of two
tools: Monte Carlo gradient estimation and inference net-
works, which when used together is what we refer to as
amortized variational inference.
2.1. Stochastic Backpropagation
The bulk of research in variational inference over the years
has been on ways in which to compute the gradient of the
expected log-likelihood ∇φEqφ(z)[log p(x|z)].
Whereas
we would have previously resorted to local variational
methods (Bishop, 2006), in general we now always com-
pute such expectations using Monte Carlo approximations
(including the KL term in the bound, if it is not analytically
known). This forms what has been aptly named doubly-
stochastic estimation (Titsias & Lazaro-Gredilla, 2014),
since we have one source of stochasticity from the mini-
batch and a second from the Monte Carlo approximation of
the expectation.
We focus on models with continuous latent variables, and
the approach we take computes the required gradients us-
ing a non-centered reparameterization of the expectation
(Papaspiliopoulos et al., 2003; Williams, 1992), combined
with Monte Carlo approximation — referred to as stochas-
tic backpropagation (Rezende et al., 2014). This approach
has also been referred to or as stochastic gradient vari-
ational Bayes (SGVB) (Kingma & Welling, 2014) or as
afﬁne variational inference (Challis & Barber, 2012).
Stochastic backpropagation involves two steps:
• Reparameterization. We reparameterize the latent
variable in terms of a known base distribution and
a differentiable transformation (such as a location-
scale transformation or cumulative distribution func-
tion). For example, if qφ(z) is a Gaussian distribution
N(z|µ, σ2), with φ = {µ, σ2}, then the location-scale

Variational Inference with Normalizing Flows
transformation using the standard Normal as a base
distribution allows us to reparameterize z as:
z ∼N(z|µ, σ2) ⇔z = µ + σϵ,
ϵ ∼N(0, 1)
• Backpropagation with Monte Carlo. We can now
differentiate (backpropagation) w.r.t. the parameters
φ of the variational distribution using a Monte Carlo
approximation with draws from the base distribution:
∇φEqφ(z)[fθ(z)] ⇔EN(ϵ|0,1)[∇φfθ(µ + σϵ)] .
A number of general purpose approaches based on Monte
Carlo control variate (MCCV) estimators exist as an alter-
native to stochastic backpropagation, and allow for gradi-
ent computation with latent variables that may be contin-
uous or discrete (Williams, 1992; Mnih & Gregor, 2014;
Ranganath et al., 2013; Wingate & Weber, 2013). An im-
portant advantage of stochastic backpropagation is that, for
models with continuous latent variables, it has the lowest
variance among competing estimators.
2.2. Inference Networks
A second important practice is that the approximate pos-
terior distribution qφ(·) is represented using a recognition
model or inference network (Rezende et al., 2014; Dayan,
2000; Gershman & Goodman, 2014; Kingma & Welling,
2014).
An inference network is a model that learns an
inverse map from observations to latent variables.
Us-
ing an inference network, we avoid the need to compute
per data point variational parameters, but can instead com-
pute a set of global variational parameters φ valid for in-
ference at both training and test time. This allows us to
amortize the cost of inference by generalizing between the
posterior estimates for all latent variables through the pa-
rameters of the inference network. The simplest inference
models that we can use are diagonal Gaussian densities,
qφ(z|x) = N(z|µφ(x), diag(σ2
φ(x))), where the mean
function µφ(x) and the standard-deviation function σφ(x)
are speciﬁed using deep neural networks.
2.3. Deep Latent Gaussian Models
In this paper, we study deep latent Gaussian models
(DLGM), which are a general class of deep directed graph-
ical models that consist of a hierarchy of L layers of Gaus-
sian latent variables zl for layer l. Each layer of latent vari-
ables is dependent on the layer above in a non-linear way,
and for DLGMs, this non-linear dependency is speciﬁed by
deep neural networks. The joint probability model is:
p(x, z1, . . . , zL) = p (x|f0(z1))
L
Y
l=1
p (zl|fl(zl+1))
(4)
where the Lth Gaussian distribution is not dependent on
any other random variables.
The prior over latent vari-
ables is a unit Gaussian p(zl) = N(0, I) and the observa-
tion likelihood pθ(x|z) is any appropriate distribution that
is conditioned on z1 and is also parameterized by a deep
neural network (ﬁgure 2). This model class is very gen-
eral and includes other models such as factor analysis and
PCA, non-linear factor analysis, and non-linear Gaussian
belief networks as special cases (Rezende et al., 2014).
DLGMs use continuous latent variables and is a model
class perfectly suited to fast amortized variational inference
using the lower bound (3) and stochastic backpropagation.
The end-to-end system of DLGM and inference network
can be viewed as an encoder-decoder architecture, and this
is the perspective taken by Kingma & Welling (2014) who
present this combination of model and inference strategy
as a variational auto-encoder. The inference networks used
in Kingma & Welling (2014); Rezende et al. (2014) are
simple diagonal or diagonal-plus-low rank Gaussian distri-
butions. The true posterior distribution will be more com-
plex than this assumption allows for, and deﬁning multi-
modal and constrained posterior approximations in a scal-
able manner remains a signiﬁcant open problem in varia-
tional inference.
3. Normalizing Flows
By examining the bound (3), we can see that the optimal
variational distribution that allows IDKL[q∥p] = 0 is one
for which qφ(z|x) = pθ(z|x), i.e. q matches the true pos-
terior distribution. This possibility is obviously not realiz-
able given the typically used q(·) distributions, such as in-
dependent Gaussians or other mean-ﬁeld approximations.
Indeed, one limitation of the variational methodology due
to the available choices of approximating families, is that
even in an asymptotic regime we can not obtain the true
posterior. Thus, an ideal family of variational distributions
qφ(z|x) is one that is highly ﬂexible, preferably ﬂexible
enough to contain the true posterior as one solution. One
path towards this ideal is based on the principle of nor-
malizing ﬂows (Tabak & Turner, 2013; Tabak & Vanden-
Eijnden, 2010).
A normalizing ﬂow describes the transformation of a prob-
ability density through a sequence of invertible mappings.
By repeatedly applying the rule for change of variables,
the initial density ‘ﬂows’ through the sequence of invert-
ible mappings. At the end of this sequence we obtain a
valid probability distribution and hence this type of ﬂow is
referred to as a normalizing ﬂow.
3.1. Finite Flows
The basic rule for transformation of densities considers an
invertible, smooth mapping f : IRd →IRd with inverse
f −1 = g, i.e. the composition g ◦f(z) = z. If we use
this mapping to transform a random variable z with distri-
bution q(z), the resulting random variable z′ = f(z) has a

Variational Inference with Normalizing Flows
distribution :
q(z′) = q(z)
det ∂f −1
∂z′
 = q(z)
det ∂f
∂z

−1
,
(5)
where the last equality can be seen by applying the chain
rule (inverse function theorem) and is a property of Jaco-
bians of invertible functions. We can construct arbitrarily
complex densities by composing several simple maps and
successively applying (5). The density qK(z) obtained by
successively transforming a random variable z0 with distri-
bution q0 through a chain of K transformations fk is:
zK = fK ◦. . . ◦f2 ◦f1(z0)
(6)
ln qK(zK) = ln q0(z0) −
K
X
k=1
ln
det
∂fk
∂zk−1
 ,
(7)
where equation (6) will be used throughout the paper as a
shorthand for the composition fK(fK−1(. . . f1(x))). The
path traversed by the random variables zk = fk(zk−1) with
initial distribution q0(z0) is called the ﬂow and the path
formed by the successive distributions qk is a normalizing
ﬂow. A property of such transformations, often referred
to as the law of the unconscious statistician (LOTUS), is
that expectations w.r.t. the transformed density qK can be
computed without explicitly knowing qK. Any expectation
EqK[h(z)] can be written as an expectation under q0 as:
EqK[h(z)] = Eq0[h(fK ◦fK−1 ◦. . . ◦f1(z0))],
(8)
which does not require computation of the the logdet-
Jacobian terms when h(z) does not depend on qK.
We can understand the effect of invertible ﬂows as a se-
quence of expansions or contractions on the initial density.
For an expansion, the map z′ = f(z) pulls the points z
away from a region in IRd, reducing the density in that re-
gion while increasing the density outside the region. Con-
versely, for a contraction, the map pushes points towards
the interior of a region, increasing the density in its interior
while reducing the density outside.
The formalism of normalizing ﬂows now gives us a sys-
tematic way of specifying the approximate posterior distri-
butions q(z|x) required for variational inference. With an
appropriate choice of transformations fK, we can initially
use simple factorized distributions such as an independent
Gaussian, and apply normalizing ﬂows of different lengths
to obtain increasingly complex and multi-modal distribu-
tions.
3.2. Inﬁnitesimal Flows
It is natural to consider the case in which the length of the
normalizing ﬂow tends to inﬁnity. In this case, we obtain
an inﬁnitesimal ﬂow, that is described not in terms of a ﬁ-
nite sequence of transformations — a ﬁnite ﬂow, but as a
partial differential equation describing how the initial den-
sity q0(z) evolves over ‘time’:
∂
∂tqt(z) = Tt[qt(z)], where
T describes the continuous-time dynamics.
Langevin Flow. One important family of ﬂows is given by
the Langevin stochastic differential equation (SDE):
dz(t) = F(z(t), t)dt + G(z(t), t)dξ(t),
(9)
where dξ(t) is a Wiener process with E[ξi(t)] = 0 and
E[ξi(t)ξj(t′)] = δi,jδ(t −t′), F is the drift vector and
D = GG⊤is the diffusion matrix. If we transform a
random variable z with initial density q0(z) through the
Langevin ﬂow (9), then the rules for the transformation
of densities is given by the Fokker-Planck equation (or
Kolmogorov equations in probability theory). The density
qt(z) of the transformed samples at time t will evolve as:
∂
∂tqt(z)=−
X
i
∂
∂zi
[Fi(z, t)qt]+1
2
X
i,j
∂2
∂zi∂zj
[Dij(z, t)qt] .
In machine learning, we most often use the Langevin ﬂow
with F(z, t) = −∇zL(z) and G(z, t) =
√
2δij, where
L(z) is an unnormalised log-density of our model.
Importantly, in this case the stationary solution for qt(z)
is given by the Boltzmann distribution: q∞(z) ∝e−L(z).
That is, if we start from an initial density q0(z) and
evolve its samples z0 through the Langevin SDE, the re-
sulting points z∞will be distributed according to q∞(z) ∝
e−L(z), i.e. the true posterior. This approach has been ex-
plored for sampling from complex densities by Welling &
Teh (2011); Ahn et al. (2012); Suykens et al. (1998).
Hamiltonian Flow. Hamiltonian Monte Carlo can also be
described in terms of a normalizing ﬂow on an augmented
space ˜z = (z, ω) with dynamics resulting from the Hamil-
tonian H(z, ω) = −L(z)−1
2ω⊤Mω; HMC is also widely
used in machine learning, e.g., Neal (2011). We will use the
Hamiltonian ﬂow to make a connection to the recently in-
troduced Hamiltonian variational approach from Salimans
et al. (2015) in section 5.
4. Inference with Normalizing Flows
To allow for scalable inference using ﬁnite normalizing
ﬂows, we must specify a class of invertible transformations
that can be used and an efﬁcient mechanism for computing
the determinant of the Jacobian. While it is straightforward
to build invertible parametric functions for use in equa-
tion (5), e.g., invertible neural networks (Baird et al., 2005;
Rippel & Adams, 2013), such approaches typically have
a complexity for computing the Jacobian determinant that
scales as O(LD3), where D is the dimension of the hidden
layers and L is the number of hidden layers used. Further-
more, computing the gradients of the Jacobian determinant
involves several additional operations that are also O(LD3)

Variational Inference with Normalizing Flows
and involve matrix inverses that can be numerically unsta-
ble. We therefore require normalizing ﬂows that allow for
low-cost computation of the determinant, or where the Ja-
cobian is not needed at all.
4.1. Invertible Linear-time Transformations
We consider a family of transformations of the form:
f(z) = z + uh(w⊤z + b),
(10)
where λ = {w ∈IRD, u ∈IRD, b ∈IR} are free pa-
rameters and h(·) is a smooth element-wise non-linearity,
with derivative h′(·). For this mapping we can compute
the logdet-Jacobian term in O(D) time (using the matrix
determinant lemma):
ψ(z) = h′(w⊤z + b)w
(11)
det ∂f
∂z
 = | det(I + uψ(z)⊤)| = |1 + u⊤ψ(z)|. (12)
From (7) we conclude that the density qK(z) obtained by
transforming an arbitrary initial density q0(z) through the
sequence of maps fk of the form (10) is implicitly given
by:
zK = fK ◦fK−1 ◦. . . ◦f1(z)
ln qK(zK) = ln q0(z) −
K
X
k=1
ln |1 + u⊤
k ψk(zk−1)|. (13)
The ﬂow deﬁned by the transformation (13) modiﬁes the
initial density q0 by applying a series of contractions and
expansions in the direction perpendicular to the hyperplane
w⊤z+b = 0, hence we refer to these maps as planar ﬂows.
As an alternative, we can consider a family of transforma-
tions that modify an initial density q0 around a reference
point z0. The transformation family is:
f(z) = z + βh(α, r)(z −z0),
(14)
det ∂f
∂z
 = [1 + βh(α, r)]d−1 [1 + βh(α, r) + βh′(α, r)r)] ,
where r = |z −z0|, h(α, r) = 1/(α + r), and the param-
eters of the map are λ = {z0 ∈IRD, α ∈IR+, β ∈IR}.
This family also allows for linear-time computation of the
determinant. It applies radial contractions and expansions
around the reference point and are thus referred to as radial
ﬂows. We show the effect of expansions and contractions
on a uniform and Gaussian initial density using the ﬂows
(10) and (14) in ﬁgure 1. This visualization shows that we
can transform a spherical Gaussian distribution into a bi-
modal distribution by applying two successive transforma-
tions.
Not all functions of the form (10) or (14) will be invert-
ible. We discuss the conditions for invertibility and how to
satisfy them in a numerically stable way in the appendix.
K=1
K=2
Planar
Radial
q0
K=1
K=2
K=10
K=10
Unit Gaussian
Uniform
Figure 1. Effect of normalizing ﬂow on two distributions.
Inference network
Generative model
Figure 2. Inference and generative models. Left: Inference net-
work maps the observations to the parameters of the ﬂow; Right:
generative model which receives the posterior samples from the
inference network during training time. Round containers repre-
sent layers of stochastic variables whereas square containers rep-
resent deterministic layers.
4.2. Flow-Based Free Energy Bound
If we parameterize the approximate posterior distribution
with a ﬂow of length K, qφ(z|x) := qK(zK), the free en-
ergy (3) can be written as an expectation over the initial
distribution q0(z):
F(x) = Eqφ(z|x)[log qφ(z|x) −log p(x, z)]
= Eq0(z0) [ln qK(zK) −log p(x, zK)]
= Eq0(z0) [ln q0(z0)] −Eq0(z0) [log p(x, zK)]
−Eq0(z0)
" K
X
k=1
ln |1 + u⊤
k ψk(zk−1)|
#
.
(15)
Normalizing ﬂows and this free energy bound can be used
with any variational optimization scheme, including gener-
alized variational EM. For amortized variational inference,
we construct an inference model using a deep neural net-
work to build a mapping from the observations x to the
parameters of the initial density q0 = N(µ, σ) (µ ∈IRD
and σ ∈IRD) as well as the parameters of the ﬂow λ.
4.3. Algorithm Summary and Complexity
The resulting algorithm is a simple modiﬁcation of the
amortized inference algorithm for DLGMs described by
(Kingma & Welling, 2014; Rezende et al., 2014), which
we summarize in algorithm 1. By using an inference net-

Variational Inference with Normalizing Flows
Algorithm 1 Variational Inf. with Normalizing Flows
Parameters: φ variational, θ generative
while not converged do
x ←{Get mini-batch}
z0 ∼q0(•|x)
zK ←fK ◦fK−1 ◦. . . ◦f1(z0)
F(x) ≈F(x, zK)
∆θ ∝−∇θF(x)
∆φ ∝−∇φF(x)
end while
work we are able to form a single computational graph
which allows for easy computation of all the gradients
of the parameters of the inference network and the gen-
erative model. The estimated gradients are used in con-
junction with preconditioned stochastic gradient-based op-
timization methods such as RMSprop or AdaGrad (Duchi
et al., 2010), where we use parameter updates of the form:
(θt+1, φt+1) ←(θt, φt) + Γt(gt
θ, gt
φ), with Γ is a diago-
nal preconditioning matrix that adaptively scales the gradi-
ents for faster minimization.
The algorithmic complexity of jointly sampling and com-
puting the log-det-Jacobian terms of the inference model
scales as O(LN 2) + O(KD), where L is the number of
deterministic layers used to map the data to the parame-
ters of the ﬂow, N is the average hidden layer size, K is
the ﬂow-length and D is the dimension of the latent vari-
ables. Thus the overall algorithm is at most quadratic mak-
ing the overall approach competitive with other large-scale
systems used in practice.
5. Alternative Flow-based Posteriors
Using the framework of normalizing ﬂows, we can provide
a uniﬁed view of recent proposals for designing more ﬂexi-
ble posterior approximations. At the outset, we distinguish
between two types of ﬂow mechanisms that differ in how
the Jacobian is handled. The work in this paper considers
general normalizing ﬂows and presents a method for linear-
time computation of the Jacobian.
In contrast, volume-
preserving ﬂows design the ﬂow such that its Jacobian-
determinant is equal to one while still allowing for rich pos-
terior distributions. Both these categories allow for ﬂows
that may be ﬁnite or inﬁnitesimal.
The
Non-linear
Independent
Components
Estimation
(NICE) developed by Dinh et al. (2014) is an instance of
a ﬁnite volume-preserving ﬂow. The transformations used
are neural networks f(·) with easy to compute inverses g(·)
of the form:
f(z) = (zA, zB + hλ(zA)),
(16)
g(z′) = (z′
A, z′
B −hλ(z′
A)).
(17)
where z = (zA, zB) is an arbitrary partitioning of the vec-
tor z and hλ is a neural network with parameters λ. This
form results in a Jacobian that has a zero upper triangu-
lar part, resulting in a determinant of 1. In order to build
a transformation capable of mixing all components of the
initial random variable z0, such ﬂows must alternate be-
tween different partitionings of zk. The resulting density
using the forward and inverse transformations is given by :
ln qK(fK ◦fK−1 ◦. . . ◦f1(z0)) = ln q0(z0),
(18)
ln qK(z′) = q0(g1 ◦g2 ◦. . . ◦gK(z′)).
(19)
We will compare NICE to the general transformation ap-
proach described in section 2.1. Dinh et al. (2014) assume
the partitioning is of the form z = [zA = z1:d, zB =
zd+1:D]. To enhance mixing of the components in the ﬂow,
we introduce two mechanisms for mixing the components
of z before separating them in the disjoint subgroups zA
and zB. The ﬁrst mechanism applies a random permutation
(NICE-perm) and the second applies a random orthogonal
transformation (NICE-orth)1.
The Hamiltonian variational approximation (HVI) devel-
oped by Salimans et al. (2015) is an instance of an in-
ﬁnitesimal volume-preserving ﬂow. For HVI, we consider
posterior approximations q(z, ω|x) that make use of addi-
tional auxiliary variables ω. The latent variables z are inde-
pendent of the auxiliary variables ω and using the change
of variables rule, the resulting distribution is: q(z′, ω′) =
|J|q(z)q(ω), where z′, ω′ = f(z, ω) using a transforma-
tion f. Salimans et al. (2015) obtain a volume-preserving
invertible transformation by exploiting the use of such tran-
sition operators in the MCMC literature, in particular the
methods of Langevin and Hybrid Monte Carlo. This is an
extremely elegant approach, since we now know that as the
number of iterations of the transition function tends to in-
ﬁnity, the distribution q(z′) will tend to the true distribu-
tion p(z|x). This is an alternative way to make use of the
Hamiltonian inﬁnitesimal ﬂow described in section 3.2. A
disadvantage of using the Langevin or Hamiltonian ﬂow
is that they require one or more evaluations of the likeli-
hood and its gradients (depending in the number of leapfrog
steps) per iteration during both training and test time.
6. Results
Throughout this section we evaluate the effect of using nor-
malizing ﬂow-based posterior approximations for inference
in deep latent Gaussian models (DLGMs). Training was
performed by following a Monte Carlo estimate of the gra-
dient of an annealed version of the free energy (20), with
respect the model parameters θ and the variational param-
eters φ using stochastic backpropoagation.
The Monte
1 Random orthogonal transformations can be generated by
sampling a matrix with independent unit-Gaussian entries Ai,j ∼
N(0, I) and then performing a QR-factorization. The resulting
Q-matrix will be a random orthogonal matrix (Genz, 1998).

Variational Inference with Normalizing Flows
Table 1. Test energy functions.
Potential U(z)
1: 1
2

∥z∥−2
0.4
2
−ln

e
−1
2
hz1−2
0.6
i2
+ e
−1
2
hz1+2
0.6
i2
2: 1
2
hz2−w1(z)
0.4
i2
3: −ln

e
−1
2
hz2−w1(z)
0.35
i2
+ e
−1
2
hz2−w1(z)+w2(z)
0.35
i2
4: −ln

e
−1
2
hz2−w1(z)
0.4
i2
+ e
−1
2
hz2−w1(z)+w3(z)
0.35
i2
with w1(z) = sin
  2πz1
4

, w2(z) = 3e
−1
2
h (z1−1)
0.6
i2
,
w3(z) = 3σ
 z1−1
0.3

and σ(x) = 1/(1 + e−x).
Carlo estimate is computed using a single sample of the
latent variables per data-point per parameter update.
A simple annealed version of the free energy is used since
this was found to provide better results.
The modiﬁed
bound is:
zK = fK ◦fK−1 ◦. . . ◦f1(z)
Fβt(x) = Eq0(z0)

ln pK(zK) −log p(x, zK)

= Eq0(z0) [ln q0(z0)] −βtEq0(z0) [log p(x, zK)]
−Eq0(z0)
" K
X
k=1
ln |1 + uT
k ψk(zk−1)|
#
(20)
where βt ∈[0, 1] is an inverse temperature that follows a
schedule βt = min(1, 0.01+t/10000), going from 0.01 to
1 after 10000 iterations.
The deep neural networks that form the conditional prob-
ability between random variables consist of determinis-
tic layers with 400 hidden units using the Maxout non-
linearity on windows of 4 variables (Goodfellow et al.,
2013) . Brieﬂy, the Maxout non-linearity with window-
size ∆takes an input vector x ∈IRd and computes:
Maxout(x)k = maxi∈{∆k,∆(k+1)} xi for k = 0 . . . d/∆.
We use mini-batches of 100 data points and RMSprop
optimization (with learning rate =
1 × 10−5 and
momentum = 0.9) (Kingma & Welling, 2014; Rezende
et al., 2014). Results were collected after 500, 000 parame-
ter updates. Each experiment was repeated 100 times with
different random seeds and we report the averaged scores
and standard errors. The true marginal likelihood is esti-
mated by importance sampling using 200 samples from the
inference network as in (Rezende et al., 2014, App. E).
6.1. Representative Power of Normalizing Flows
To provide an insight into the representative power of den-
sity approximations based on normalizing ﬂows, we pa-
rameterize a set of unnormalized 2D densities p(z) ∝
exp[−U(z)] which are listed in table 1.
In ﬁgure 3(a) we show the true distribution for four cases,
1
2
3
4
(a)
K = 2
K = 8
K = 32
(b) Norm. Flow
K = 2
K = 8
K = 32
(c) NICE
●
●
●
0
1
2
3
10
20
30
Flow length
Variational Bound (nats)
Architecture
●
PF
NICE−orth
NICE−perp
RF
●
●
●
−1.0
−0.5
0.0
0.5
10
20
30
Flow length
Variational Bound (nats)
Architecture
●
PF
NICE−orth
NICE−perp
RF
●
●
●
−0.8
−0.4
0.0
10
20
30
Flow length
Variational Bound (nats)
Architecture
●
PF
NICE−orth
NICE−perp
RF
(d) Comparison of KL-divergences.
Figure 3. Approximating four non-Gaussian 2D distributions.
The images represent densities for each energy function in table
1 in the range (−4, 4)2. (a) True posterior; (b) Approx poste-
rior using the normalizing ﬂow (13); (c) Approx posterior using
NICE (19); (d) Summary results comparing KL-divergences be-
tween the true and approximated densities for the ﬁrst 3 cases.
which show distributions that have characteristics such as
multi-modality and periodicity that cannot be captured with
typically-used posterior approximations.
Figure 3(b) shows the performance of normalizing ﬂow
approximations for these densities using ﬂow lengths of
2, 8 and 32 transformations.
The non-linearity h(z) =
tanh(z) in equation (10) was used for the mapping and
the initial distribution was a diagonal Gaussian, q0(z) =
N(z|µ, σ2I). We see a substantial improvement in the ap-
proximation quality as we increase the ﬂow length. Fig-
ure 3(c) shows the same approximation using the volume-
preserving transformation used in NICE (Dinh et al., 2014)
for the same number of transformations. We show sum-
mary statistics for the planar ﬂow (13), and NICE (18) for
random orthogonal matrices and with random permutation
matrices in 3(d). We found that NICE and the planar ﬂow
(13) may achieve the same asymptotic performance as we
grow the ﬂow-length, but the planar ﬂow (13) requires far
fewer parameters. Presumably because all parameters of
the ﬂow (13) are learned, in contrast to NICE which re-
quires an extra mechanism for mixing the components that
is not learned but randomly initialized. We did not observe
a substantial difference between using random orthogonal
matrices or random permutation matrices in NICE.
6.2. MNIST and CIFAR-10 Images
The MNIST digit dataset (LeCun & Cortes, 1998) contains
60,000 training and 10,000 test images of ten handwritten

Variational Inference with Normalizing Flows
G
G
G
G
91
93
95
97
0
20
40
60
80
Flow length
Variational Bound (nats)
Architecture
G
NF
NICE−perm
(a) Bound F(x)
G
G
G
G
5
6
7
0
20
40
60
80
Flow length
KL(q;truth) (nats)
Architecture
G
NF
NICE−perm
(b) IDKL(q; p(z|x))
G
G
G
G
85
86
87
88
89
90
0
20
40
60
80
Flow length
−log−likelihood (nats)
Architecture
G
NF
NICE−perm
(c) −ln p(x)
Figure 4. Effect of the ﬂow-length on MNIST.
Table 2. Comparison of negative log-probabilities on the test set
for the binarised MNIST data.
Model
−ln p(x)
DLGM diagonal covariance
≤89.9
DLGM+NF (k = 10)
≤87.5
DLGM+NF (k = 20)
≤86.5
DLGM+NF (k = 40)
≤85.7
DLGM+NF (k = 80)
≤85.1
DLGM+NICE (k = 10)
≤88.6
DLGM+NICE (k = 20)
≤87.9
DLGM+NICE (k = 40)
≤87.3
DLGM+NICE (k = 80)
≤87.2
Results below from (Salimans et al., 2015)
DLGM + HVI (1 leapfrog step)
88.08
DLGM + HVI (4 leapfrog steps)
86.40
DLGM + HVI (8 leapfrog steps)
85.51
Results below from (Gregor et al., 2014)
DARN nh = 500
84.71
DARN nh = 500, adaNoise
84.13
digits (0 to 9) that are 28 × 28 pixels in size. We used the
binarized dataset as in (Uria et al., 2014). We trained differ-
ent DLGMs with 40 latent variables for 500, 000 parameter
updates.
The performance of a DLGM using the (planar) nor-
malizing
ﬂow
(DLGM+NF)
approximation
is
com-
pared to the volume-preserving approaches using NICE
(DLGM+NICE) on exactly the same model for different
ﬂow-lengths K, and we summarize the performance in ﬁg-
ure 4. This graph shows that an increase in the ﬂow-length
systematically improves the bound F, as shown in ﬁgure
4(a), and reduces the KL-divergence between the approx-
imate posterior q(z|x) and the true posterior distribution
p(z|x) (ﬁgure 4(b)). It also shows that the approach us-
ing general normalizing ﬂows outperforms that of NICE.
We also show a wider comparison in table 2. Results are
included for the Hamiltonian variational approach as well,
but the model speciﬁcation is different and thus gives an
indication of attainable performance for this approach on
this data set.
The CIFAR-10 natural images dataset (Krizhevsky & Hin-
ton, 2010) consists of 50,000 training and 10,000 test RGB
images that are of size 3x32x32 pixels from which we ex-
tract 3x8x8 random patches. The color levels were con-
verted to the range [ϵ, 1 −ϵ] with ϵ = 0.0001. Here we
used similar DLGMs as used for the MNIST experiment,
Table 3. Test set performance on the CIFAR-10 data.
K = 0
K = 2
K = 5
K = 10
−ln p(x)
-293.7
-308.6
-317.9
-320.7
but with 30 latent variables. Since this data is non-binary,
we use a logit-normal observation likelihood, p(x|µ, α) =
Q
i
N(logit(xi)|µi,αi)
xi(1−xi)
, where logit(x) = log
x
1−x. We sum-
marize the results in table 3 where we are again able to
show that an increase in the ﬂow length K systematically
improves the test log-likelihoods, resulting in better poste-
rior approximations.
7. Conclusion and Discussion
In this work we developed a simple approach for learn-
ing highly non-Gaussian posterior densities by learning
transformations of simple densities to more complex ones
through a normalizing ﬂow. When combined with an amor-
tized approach for variational inference using inference
networks and efﬁcient Monte Carlo gradient estimation, we
are able to show clear improvements over simple approxi-
mations on different problems. Using this view of normal-
izing ﬂows, we are able to provide a uniﬁed perspective of
other closely related methods for ﬂexible posterior estima-
tion that points to a wide spectrum of approaches for de-
signing more powerful posterior approximations with dif-
ferent statistical and computational tradeoffs.
An important conclusion from the discussion in section 3
is that there exist classes of normalizing ﬂows that allow us
to create extremely rich posterior approximations for vari-
ational inference. With normalizing ﬂows, we are able to
show that in the asymptotic regime, the space of solutions
is rich enough to contain the true posterior distribution. If
we combine this with the local convergence and consis-
tency results for maximum likelihood parameter estimation
in certain classes of latent variables models (Wang & Tit-
terington, 2004), we see that we are now able overcome the
objections to using variational inference as a competitive
and default approach for statistical inference. Making such
statements rigorous is an important line of future research.
Normalizing ﬂows allow us to control the complexity of the
posterior at run-time by simply increasing the ﬂow length
of the sequence. The approach we presented considered
normalizing ﬂows based on simple transformations of the
form (10) and (14). These are just two of the many maps
that can be used, and alternative transforms can be designed
for posterior approximations that may require other con-
straints, e.g., a restricted support. An important avenue of
future research lies in describing the classes of transforma-
tions that allow for different characteristics of the posterior
and that still allow for efﬁcient, linear-time computation.
Ackowledgements: We thank Charles Blundell, Theo-
phane Weber and Daan Wierstra for helpful discussions.

Variational Inference with Normalizing Flows
References
Ahn, S., Korattikara, A., and Welling, M. Bayesian poste-
rior sampling via stochastic gradient Fisher scoring. In
ICML, 2012.
Baird, L., Smalenberger, D., and Ingkiriwang, S. One-step
neural network inversion with PDF learning and emula-
tion. In IJCNN, volume 2, pp. 966–971. IEEE, 2005.
Bishop, C. M. Pattern recognition and machine learning.
springer New York, 2006.
Challis, E. and Barber, D. Afﬁne independent variational
inference. In NIPS, 2012.
Dayan, P. Helmholtz machines and wake-sleep learning.
Handbook of Brain Theory and Neural Network. MIT
Press, Cambridge, MA, 44(0), 2000.
Dinh, L., Krueger, D., and Bengio, Y. NICE: Non-linear
independent components estimation.
arXiv preprint
arXiv:1410.8516, 2014.
Duchi, J., Hazan, E., and Singer, Y. Adaptive subgradient
methods for online learning and stochastic optimization.
JMLR, 12:2121–2159, 2010.
Genz, A. Methods for generating random orthogonal ma-
trices. Monte Carlo and Quasi-Monte Carlo Methods,
1998.
Gershman, S., Hoffman, M., and Blei, D. Nonparametric
variational inference. In ICML, 2012.
Gershman, S. J. and Goodman, N. D. Amortized inference
in probabilistic reasoning. In Annual Conference of the
Cognitive Science Society, 2014.
Goodfellow, I. J., Warde-Farley, D., Mirza, M., Courville,
A., and Bengio, Y. Maxout networks. ICML, 2013.
Gregor, K., Danihelka, I., Mnih, A., Blundell, C., and Wier-
stra, D. Deep autoregressive networks. In ICML, 2014.
Gregor,
Karol,
Danihelka,
Ivo,
Graves,
Alex,
Jimenez Rezende, Danilo, and Wierstra, Daan. Draw:
A recurrent neural network for image generation.
In
ICML, 2015.
Hoffman, M. D., Blei, D. M, Wang, C., and Paisley, J.
Stochastic variational inference.
JMLR, 14(1):1303–
1347, 2013.
Jaakkola, T. S. and Jordan, M. I. Improving the mean ﬁeld
approximation via the use of mixture distributions. In
Learning in graphical models, pp. 163–173. 1998.
Jordan, M. I., Ghahramani, Z., Jaakkola, T. S., and Saul,
L. K. An introduction to variational methods for graphi-
cal models. Machine learning, 37(2):183–233, 1999.
Kingma, D. P. and Welling, M. Auto-encoding variational
Bayes. In ICLR, 2014.
Kingma, D. P., Mohamed, S., Rezende, D. J., and Welling,
M. Semi-supervised learning with deep generative mod-
els. In NIPS, pp. 3581–3589, 2014.
Krizhevsky, A. and Hinton, G. Convolutional deep belief
networks on CIFAR-10. Unpublished manuscript, 2010.
LeCun, Y. and Cortes, C. The MNIST database of hand-
written digits, 1998.
Mnih, A. and Gregor, K. Neural variational inference and
learning in belief networks. In ICML, 2014.
Neal, R. M. MCMC using hamiltonian dynamics. Hand-
book of Markov Chain Monte Carlo, 2011.
Papaspiliopoulos, O., Roberts, G. O., and Sk¨old, M. Non-
centered parameterisations for hierarchical models and
data augmentation. In Bayesian Statistics 7, 2003.
Ranganath, R., Gerrish, S., and Blei, D. M.
Black box
variational inference. In AISTATS, 2013.
Rezende, D. J., Mohamed, S., and Wierstra, D. Stochas-
tic backpropagation and approximate inference in deep
generative models. In ICML, 2014.
Rippel, O. and Adams, R. P. High-dimensional probability
estimation with deep density models. arXiv:1302.5125,
2013.
Salimans, T., Kingma, D. P., and Welling, M. Markov chain
Monte Carlo and variational inference: Bridging the gap.
In ICML, 2015.
Suykens, J. A. K., Verrelst, H., and Vandewalle, J. On-
line learning Fokker-Planck machine. Neural processing
letters, 7(2):81–89, 1998.
Tabak, E. G. and Turner, C. V. A family of nonparametric
density estimation algorithms. Communications on Pure
and Applied Mathematics, 66(2):145–164, 2013.
Tabak, E. G and Vanden-Eijnden, E. Density estimation
by dual ascent of the log-likelihood. Communications in
Mathematical Sciences, 8(1):217–233, 2010.
Titsias, M. and Lazaro-Gredilla, M. Doubly stochastic vari-
ational Bayes for non-conjugate inference.
In ICML,
2014.
Turner, R. E. and Sahani, M.
Two problems with vari-
ational expectation maximisation for time-series mod-
els. In Barber, D., Cemgil, T., and Chiappa, S. (eds.),
Bayesian Time series models, chapter 5, pp. 109–130.
Cambridge University Press, 2011.
Uria, B., Murray, I., and Larochelle, H.
A deep and
tractable density estimator. In ICML, 2014.
Wang, B. and Titterington, D. M. Convergence and asymp-
totic normality of variational Bayesian approximations
for exponential family models with missing values. In
UAI, 2004.
Welling, M. and Teh, Y. W. Bayesian learning via stochas-
tic gradient Langevin dynamics. In ICML, 2011.
Williams, Ronald J. Simple statistical gradient-following
algorithms for connectionist reinforcement learning.
Machine learning, 8(3-4):229–256, 1992.
Wingate, D. and Weber, T. Automated variational infer-
ence in probabilistic programming. In NIPS Workshop
on Probabilistic Programming, 2013.

Variational Inference with Normalizing Flows
A. Invertibility conditions
We describe the constraints required to have invertible
maps for the planar and radial normalizing ﬂows described
in section 3.
A.1. Planar ﬂows
Functions of the form (10) are not always invertible de-
pending on the non-linearity and parameters chosen. When
using h(x) = tanh(x), a sufﬁcient condition for f(z) to be
invertible is that w⊤u ≥−1.
This can be seen by splitting z as a sum of a vector z⊥per-
pendicular to w and a vector z∥, parallel to w. Substituting
z = z⊥+ z∥into (10) gives
f(z) = z⊥+ z∥+ uh(w⊤z∥+ b).
(21)
This equation can be solved for z⊥given z∥and y = f(z),
having a unique solution
z⊥= y −z∥−uh(w⊤z∥+ b).
(22)
The parallel component can be further expanded as z∥=
α w
||w||2 , where α ∈IR. The equation that must be solved
for α is derived by taking the dot product of (21) with w,
yielding the scalar equation
wT f(z) = α + wT uh(α + b).
(23)
A sufﬁcient condition for (23) to be invertible w.r.t α is that
its r.h.s α + wT uh(α + b) to be a non-decreasing function.
This corresponds to the condition 1+wT uh′(α+b) ≥0 ≡
wT u ≥−
1
h′(α+b). Since 0 ≤h′(α + b) ≤1, it sufﬁces to
have wT u ≥−1.
We enforce this constraint by taking an arbitrary vec-
tor u and modifying its component parallel to w, pro-
ducing a new vector ˆu such that w⊤ˆu > −1.
The
modiﬁed vector can be compactly written as ˆu(w, u) =
u+

m(w⊤u) −(w⊤u)

w
||w||2 , where the scalar function
m(x) is given by m(x) = −1 + log(1 + ex).
A.2. Radial ﬂows
Functions of the form (14) are not always invertible de-
pending on the values of α and β. This can be seen by
splitting the vector z as z = z0 + rˆz, where r = |z −z0|.
Replacing this into (14) gives
f(z) = z0 + rˆz + β
rˆz
α + r.
(24)
This equation can be uniquely solved for ˆz given r and y =
f(z),
ˆz =
y −z0
r

1 +
β
α+r
.
(25)
To obtain a scalar equation for the norm r, we can subtract
both sides of (24) and take the norm of both sides. This
gives
|y −z0| = r

1 +
β
α + r

.
(26)
A sufﬁcient condition for (26) to be invertible is for its r.h.s.
r

1 +
β
α+r

to be a non-decreasing function, which im-
plies β ≥−(r+α)2
α
. Since r ≥0, it sufﬁces to impose
β ≥−α. This constraint is imposed by reparametrizing β
as ˆβ = −α + m(β), where m(x) = log(1 + ex).
