Beyond Ternary OPV: High-Throughput Experimentation and 
Self-Driving Laboratories Optimize Multi-Component Systems 
 
Stefan Langner* a, Florian Häse* b,c,d,e, José Darío Perea a, Tobias Stubhan f, Jens Hauch f, 
Loïc M. Roch b,c,d,e, Thomas Heumueller a, Alán Aspuru-Guzik c,d,e,g, and Christoph J. Brabec a,b 
a Institute of Materials for Electronics and Energy Technology (i-MEET), Department of Materials Science and 
Engineering, Friedrich-Alexander University Erlangen-Nürnberg, Martensstrasse 7, 91058 Erlangen, Germany 
b Department of Chemistry and Chemical Biology, Harvard University, Cambridge, MA 02138, USA 
c Department of Chemistry, University of Toronto, Toronto, ON M5S 3H6, Canada 
d Department of Computer Science, University of Toronto, Toronto, ON M5S 3H6, Canada 
e Vector Institute for Artificial Intelligence, Toronto, ON M5S 1M1, Canada 
f Forschungszentrum Jülich GmbH, Helmholtz-Institute Erlangen-Nürnberg for Renewable Energies , 
Immerwahrstr. 2, 91058 Erlangen, Germany 
g Canadian Institute for Advanced Research (CIFAR) Lebovic Fellow, Toronto, ON M5S 1M1, Canada 
 
Fundamental advances to increase the efficiency as well as stability of organic photovoltaics 
(OPVs) are achieved by designing ternary blends which represents a clear trend towards 
multi-component active layer blends. We report the development of high-throughput and 
autonomous experimentation methods for the effective optimization of multi-component 
polymer blends for OPVs. A method for automated film formation enabling the fabrication of 
up to 6048 films per day is introduced. Equipping this automated experimentation platform 
with a Bayesian optimization, a self-driving laboratory is constructed that autonomously 
evaluates measurements to design and execute the next experiments. To demonstrate the 
potential of these methods, a four- dimensional parameter space of quaternary OPV blends 
is mapped and optimized for photo-stability. While with conventional approaches roughly 100 
mg of material would be necessary, the robot based platform can screen 2,000 combinations 
with less than 10 mg and machine learning enabled autonomous experimentation identifies 
the stable compositions with less than 1 mg. 
Introduction 
With the development of novel non-fullerene acceptors fundamental performance limitations 
of fullerene based organic solar cells (OSC) have been overcome.[1] In the currently highest 
performing system PM6:Y6 ternary additives are used to improve charge carrier lifetime and 
mobility resulting in significantly improved performance with efficiencies up to 16.5%.[2,3] 
Typically in ternary systems the host D:A ratio is kept constant, while only the content of 
additive is varied due to limited experimental resources. The existence of other optima 
beyond these constraints is usually not investigated. On the other hand, also for 
improvements of stability, ternary additives have successfully been introduced to stabilize 
morphology or prevent oxidation. These desired effects of additives are typically reverted into 
detrimental effects depending on the concentration and compatibility of the additive with the 
host system. Finding a fine balance is necessary to determine if a given additive can lead to 
a performance enhancement for a given host system. Currently the Achilles heel of the 
highest performing organic photovoltaic (OPV) systems is device stability, which motivates 
the use of a fourth stabilizing additive in performance optimized ternary systems. On the 
pathway to such highly complex optimization problems with multi-dimensional composition 
space and hundreds of possible candidates for performance enhancing additives, novel 
experimental methods are necessary.  
High-throughput experimentation (HTE) addresses these challenges by assisting the 
researcher in material synthesis, sample processing and characterization. High throughput 
methods for polymer samples have been used for adhesion evaluations [4] and cell biology 
research.[5,6] One of the main challenges of combinatorial research in OPV is the scalable 
fabrication of high-quality individual films. Recent approaches are based on gradient coating 
or ink-jet printing, which are usually limited by the number of mixable components, the 

number of samples or the need for specific ink properties.[7–9] An HTE coating method for 
organic semiconductors with a scalable number of mixable components and scalable number 
of films is not yet established. Therefore, we introduce a robot-based production of OPV-films 
via drop-casting that can mix a large number of components to form up to 6,048 films of 
different compositions per day.  
Applying this HTE system allows to screen such a vast number of compositions containing 
hundreds of possible components that conventional experimental planning and evaluation 
capabilities are exceeded. Therefore, as a second approach, we combine our HTE 
production line with a machine learning (ML) tool,[10–13] to form a self-driving laboratory (SDL), 
for accelerated process optimization and materials discovery.  
In this ML-driven approach, new experiments are suggested based on all previously 
collected measurements. To this end, the ML decision-maker infers the outcomes of all 
possible experiments, leveraging statistical correlations identified from the prior 
measurements, and suggests the most informative ones for future evaluation.  
To the best of our knowledge, the first self-driving laboratory reported an autonomous 
chemical synthesis where all the steps of the experimental procedure are controlled by a 
computer and driven by a local optimization algorithm.[14] Since then, the self-driving 
approach was used to optimize carbon nanotube growth,[15] polyoxometalate clusters, metal-
based alloys,[16] and organic synthesis reactions[17,18]. More recently, in an area related to this 
work, a thin-film self-driving robot was used to improve film quality and thermal stability of 
hole-transport materials for clean energy technologies.[19] 
Herein we demonstrate the benefits of HTE and the self-driving approach on the design of 
photostable material composites for OPV. While recently lifetimes of up to 10 years under 
continuous illumination in nitrogen atmosphere were reported,[20] photo-stability of OSC 
materials under the influence of oxygen and moisture is a critical challenge. Currently 
available encapsulation films for OPV materials are a major cost factor of the final product 
while their water vapor transmission rate is typically 10-3 g/(m2day). As higher quality barrier 
films are currently not manufacturable at a competitive price, optimizing active layer materials 
for photo-stability in the presence of oxygen and water is a critical step for commercial 
applications. Interestingly, complex photo-chemical interactions between donor, acceptor and 
oxygen can suppress or enhance photo-oxidation in D:A blends.[21,22] Further, adding a third 
component to the active layer may increase thermal and light stability.[23,24] However, the 
degradation behaviors of higher dimensional multi-component systems may depend on 
various interactions between the components.  
Therefore, we use an optimization of four component active layer blends as an experimental 
proof of concept for our high throughput film formation and characterization system with 
machine learning enabled self-driving capability. In the following, grid based high-throughput 
experimentation will be compared to the self-driving approach (Figure 1C).  
 
High-throughput Experimentation 
The automated platform (Figure 1B and Figure S1) employed for this study was already 
used in our group to successfully synthesize and characterize organo metal-halide 
perovskites and organic nanoparticles with outstanding precision.[25,26] To form high quality 
drop-cast films on inert carriers, we optimized a system to create separate wells on a glass 
plate. Printing a well structure with UV-curable epoxy allowed a minimal height of the 
separating walls to reduce material accumulation at the walls resulting in high quality films 
with a large homogenous area (Figure 1C and Figure S2A). Demonstrating the scalability of 
our approach, two quaternary blend systems were investigated simultaneously. The first 
system contains PTB7-Th and P3HT as polymer donors (white squares in Figure 1A), while 
in the second system PBQ-QF is used (black squares in Figure 1A). In both systems, PCBM 
and oIDTBR are employed as acceptors. Overall for both material systems, almost 2,100 
single films were fabricated and tested within 7 days with more than 5,000 recorded 
absorbance spectra, see experimental section and Figure S2B. 
 

 
Figure 1. A) Representations of the three polymer donors and the two small molecule acceptors. Note that the 
first quaternary system consists of P3HT, PBQ-QF, PCBM, and oIDTBr (■) and the second of P3HT, PTB7-Th, 
PCBM, and oIDTBr (□). B) Side view of the automated platform for ink formulation, coating and characterization. 
C) Experimental workflow with the two approaches adopted in this study: conventional high-throughput 
experimentation via grid and the self-driving approach with the ChemOS software package.   
In Figure 1C, the experimental workflow of the robot process is illustrated schematically. 
Starting with a pre-defined grid of compositions (or the ML-self-driving approach, see 
subsection 3), individual inks are formulated automatically using a commercially available 
liquid-handling robot. The inks are drop-cast onto customized 96-well glass substrates to 
form uniform semiconductor layers. The glass plates are then illuminated with metal halide 
lamps at one sun intensity for 18 hours in ambient air to induce photo-oxidization of the 
active layers, which can be measured by absorbance loss. Absorbance spectra were 
recorded before and after light treatment using a microplate reader.  
The reproducibility of film formation and degradation is very high with an R² of 0.97 for 309 
tested samples (Figure S3) while the film thickness, as measured by a profilometer, ranged 
between 70-80 nm. Given the accuracy of our dispensing system, we allowed variations of all 
four components (PTB7-Th, P3HT, oIDTBR, PCBM) in two percent steps resulting in 23,426 
possible compositions. For the first high throughput test, a subset of 1,041 points was 
selected containing all single components, binary and ternary variations with 10 wt.-% 
increment (202 samples) as well as 820 randomly selected quaternary samples plus 19 
duplicates for reproducibility verification. For the second system, the same set of 
compositions was used while only PTB7-Th was replaced by PBQ-QF. 
 
The degradation behavior of the quaternary system containing PTB7-Th is depicted in 
Figure 2A (left side) where degradation is denoted as the integral change of the absorption 
spectra for each composition before and after degradation. It clearly shows strong 
degradation of PTB7-Th with a relative absorbance loss of 68%, while P3HT lost around 
19%. The two acceptor materials exhibited minimal change in absorbance. Moreover, it is 
observed that the binary series of PTB7-Th toward PCBM or oIDTBR (see also Figure S4 
and S5) leads to a linear increase of photo-stability with acceptor content. But non-linear 
trends are observed as well, as already slight amounts of P3HT (~10 wt.-%) stabilize PTB7-
Th completely leading to blend stabilities similar to pristine P3HT. More surprisingly, blends 
containing both oIDTBR and PCBM show a drastic destabilization effect causing a large 
instable area in the quaternary space (Figure 2A). As this is also observed in a binary 
PC61BM
P3HT
oIDTBR
PBQ-QF
PTB7-Th
A. Materials
B. Automated platform for blend film formation
HT coating
ink preparation
C. High-throughput experimentation and closed-loop experimentation

mixture of PCBM and oIDTBR (absorbance loss up to 74%) it seems to be caused by a 
specific interaction between the two acceptors that may be rooted in the formation of a 
specific morphology that might facilitate the movement of oxygen molecules through the 
active layer. In the second quaternary system, where PTB7-Th is replaced with PBQ-QF, the 
same PCBM:oIDTBR instability area is discovered, while most other compositions show 
improved photo-stabilities, which is in line with the high stability of pristine PBQ-QF (Figure 
S4-S6). A detailed viewing of the robot process and the 4D stability-space is found as 
cinematic illustration in the supporting information. 
 
Figure 2. A) Photo-stability of the quaternary system containing PTB7-Th illustrated by the 4D hypersurface and 
pyramid cross sections. Degradation is defined as the relative spectral loss in absorbance. Black dots represent 
measured data points, while the color map is interpolated. B) Comparison the covered experimental space 
between grid-based high-throughput experimentation and self-driving optimization. The compositional distance to 
the most stable blend is calculated as          √               ) with x,y,z,t representing the weight 
fractions of the four blend components. 
 
Self-driving Laboratory 
Instead of a large predefined grid, we utilized intelligent experimental design for the self-
driving approach (SDA). The machine learning driven software package ChemOS 
coordinates the flow of information between the automated equipment, the researchers and 
the experiment planning module.[27,28] The software enables the remote exchange of 
experimental parameters and measurements, which enables the operation of experiment 
planning strategies and robotics platforms at different locations. In line with the identified 
steps of closed-loop experimentation,[10] we extended ChemOS by an additional module 
which maps the parameter space of the experiment planner to technical constraints of the 
robot (see Section S.1).  
From the experiment planner, we used the active learning global optimizer Phoenics to learn 
and navigate the multi-dimensional parameter space. This ML strategy learns by doing and 
does not need to be trained with prior measurements. Following a Bayesian optimization 
strategy, a surrogate model is constructed from parameter kernel densities estimated via 
Bayesian neural networks. This architecture enables a favorable linear scaling and reduces 
the computational cost of the optimization algorithm in contrast to, for examples, approaches 
based on Gaussian processes. Phoenics also streamlines the throughput of automated 
solutions via a sampling parameter, which explicitly controls the sampling behavior of the 
algorithm, gradually exploring and exploiting. Alternating the sampling behavior during the 
experimental campaign has been shown to accelerate the optimization process and reduce 
the number of samples.[29] In this experiment, ChemOS leveraged Phoenics to suggest four 
blends per closed-loop event, and increases the experimentation throughput by 
simultaneously coordinating the self-driving approach for the two studied blend systems. To 
ensure that any active layer composition which will be found contains an OPV relevant 
donor:acceptor ratio, a boundary condition limits the D:A ratio from 1:5 to 5:1. Starting from 4 
random compositions and their stability results, ChemOS iteratively suggested the next set of 
4 compositions which were fabricated, degraded and characterized. As an initial test run 15 

iterations requiring 15 consecutive 18 h degradation tests were made. Here, two identical 
samples were fabricated for each composition to probe experimental noise.   
While the SDA focused more on the stable regions in an exploitative search toward a global 
minimum an explorative component probed numerous stable and unstable compositions 
covering largely the same experimental space as the high throughput test. The experimental 
space for both HTE and SDA in the PTB7-Th based system is displayed in Figure 2B (for 
PBQ-QF see Figure S7). Here, each data point represents the stability of a quaternary 
composition plotted over their distance (in terms of compositional difference) to the most 
stable composition as found by grid-HTE. The results demonstrate how the Bayesian 
optimization reconstructed the stability distribution of grid-HTE with a much smaller number 
of samples (only 7%) compared to HTE. Generally, photo-stable compounds can be found 
along the entire distance axis, indicating a broad area of stable compositions rather than a 
single point minimum (Figure S8). To accommodate for such broad minima, the merit 
function had been adjusted after an initial test run (see SI). It is observed that the self-driving 
approach is able to find competitive photostable blends within only 15 learning iterations (4 
samples each). The best compositions found by the two formulated merit functions are on a 
par with the best compositions screened by grid-HTE (Table S1). 
 
Statistical Comparison 
To have a large number of tests that allow statistical comparisons between HTE and SDA, 
virtual experiments were performed on a calculated stability grid. From the data collected for 
the two blend systems during the HTE runs, we constructed probabilistic regression models 
to emulate the response surfaces of the two experiments (Figure 2A and Figure S5). Then 
models, or virtual robots, were set up as Bayesian neural networks (BNNs) and were trained 
to predict the photo-stability for any possible set of material compositions for the two blend 
systems. This approach has already been demonstrated in the context of emulating HPLC 
calibrations.[30] Details on the network architectures, the training procedures and the 
prediction accuracies on the observed (training sets) and unobserved data (test sets) for both 
blends are reported in the supporting information (see Section S.3). The virtual robots are 
made available on GitHub.[31] 
 
 
Figure 3. A) Performances of high-throughput experimentation (red traces) and ChemOS/Phoenics (blue traces) 
on the virtual robots related to the PTB7-Th based system. Note that the traces were averaged over 10,000 
independent grid samplings and 200 independent ChemOS optimizations. B) Top: Statistical output of the virtual 
robot showing the acceleration of SDA over HTE; Bottom: Confidence to improve on HTE within given budget of 
30 or 60 samples. Both are related to the PTB7-Th based system. C) Consumption comparison between manual 
testing, high-throughput experimentation, SDA with budget of 60 samples and virtually optimized SDA with budget 
of 30 samples. The calculations are limited to one quaternary system. 
 

Our results on the virtual robots (Figure 3A) indicate that the self-driving approach requires 
on average 27 samples on the PTB7-Th blend system to identify a blend which is at least as 
photostable as the most stable blend discovered by grid-HTE. Furthermore, we find that 
within a given budget of 30 (60) samples, the SDA identifies more photostable blends than 
HTE with a chance of about 96% (97.5%) (Figure 3B). Based on these results the discovery 
of photostable blends is accelerated by a factor of ca. 33x for PTB7-Th (and ca. 32x for PBQ-
QF, Figure S9) over conventional HTE as indicated by the virtual robots. Further details on 
the statistical analysis are reported in the ESI (see Section S.4). 
 
Figure 3C demonstrates the benefits of grid based high-throughput research and the self-
driving approach over manual experimentation. Within this comparison we assume that 
systematic manual testing requires the preparation of 500 samples, with a throughput of 20 
samples per day, to obtain equivalent information as with HTE of 1,000 samples. Using 
conventional 1-inch substrates, typical solution concentrations of 30 mg/mL and coating 
methods, such as spin-coating or blade-coating, a consumption of 188 mg per compound is 
expected. In contrast, HTE needs only 7.5 mg per compound due to the low concentration of 
0.6 mg/mL used in drop-casting. Moreover, even as 288 samples are tested in a single day, 
HTE guarantees a stable process with highly reproducible data. The substantially reduced 
number of samples for the self-driving approach with only 60 samples further reduces the 
amount of consumed materials to 0.45 mg per compound. Following the findings from the 
virtual robots, the number of samples could even be reduced to 30 (0.225 mg) while 
maintaining a confidence of over 95% (optimized SDA). Note that for ChemOS the given 
throughput of 4 samples per day and blend system is based on the iterative degradation 
process. Nevertheless by parallelization across blend systems, ChemOS is able to run and 
optimize 16 blend systems simultaneously further accelerating the discovery process.  
 
Conclusion and Outlook 
We have demonstrated how complex multi-component optimization problems for next 
generation OSC active layers can be highly accelerated by a novel high throughput film 
deposition technique combined with automated characterization and machine learning 
enabled experimental design. Over 2000 different quaternary active layers were tested in 7 
days with a materials consumption of less than 15 mg per component. This enables a more 
thorough stability investigation of novel OPV materials and their interactions with other blend 
components at ultra-low material consumptions. Implementing a machine learning 
optimization algorithm, equivalent information about stability minima and maxima could be 
found with a sample reduction of around 93%. In our specific test case, P3HT and PBQ-QF 
rich blends show improved stability over PTB7-Th rich blends. O-IDTBR and PCBM can 
destabilize each other with dramatic consequences for the active layer blend. 
As a next step the inclusion of additional characterization methods and target properties e.g. 
photoluminescence or conductivity could allow to not only optimize for stability but also for 
electrical performance. Recently, Häse et al. with Chimera, demonstrated a hierarchy-based 
general purpose achievement scalarizing function designed to address multi-parameter 
optimizations in self-driving laboratories.[30] 
 
Experimental Section 
High-throughput coating:  
Stock solutions of the materials in chlorobenzene were manually prepared with a 
concentration of 0.6 mg/mL. All further ink formulations were mixed by a liquid handling robot 
[Freedom Evo 100; Tecan Group AG, Switzerland] using 96-well polypropylene microplates 
[Eppendorf, Germany]. To guarantee good intermixing, an aspirate/dispense step was 
repeated for three times before drop-casting 25 µL of each mixture onto a pre-patterned 
glass substrate. The films are dried at 60 °C for 4 minutes. 96 individual films can be formed 
in 22 min. To obtain stabile morphologies, a thermal annealing step at 120 °C for 15 min was 
performed. Further descriptions are reported in the supporting information (see Section S.5) 

Authorship contributions 
C.J.B., T.H. and A.A.-G. conceived and supervised the project. S.L. developed the substrate 
patterning and optimized the robot-process. S.L. and J.D.P. performed the experiments. S.L. 
evaluated the data and interpreted the experimental results. F.H. and L.M.R designed and 
implemented adaptations to ChemOS. F.H. and L.M.R designed statistical analyses with the 
virtual robot, which were implemented and executed by F.H. F.H and L.M.R analyzed and 
interpreted the results from the virtual robot. T.S. and J.H. set up the robot equipment and 
supervised the experiments. All authors contributed to the discussion, writing and editing of 
the manuscript. S.L. and F.H. contributed equally to this work. 
 
Conflicts of interest 
There are no conflicts to declare. 
 
Acknowledgments 
The authors want to thank Klaus Burlafinger for fruitful discussions. S.L., T.H. and C.J.B. 
gratefully thank the Deutsche Forschungsgemeinschaft (DFG) in the framework of SFB 953 
“Synthetic Carbon Allotropes” (PN 182849149) for financial support. J.D.P. acknowledges 
the doctoral fellowship grant of the Colombian Agency COLCIENCIAS. F.H. acknowledges 
support from the Herchel Smith Graduate Fellowship and the Jacques-Emile Dubois Student 
Dissertation Fellowship. L.M.R., and A.A-G. were supported by Tata Sons Limited − Alliance 
Agreement (A32391). F.H., L.M.R., and A.A-G. thank Dr. Anders Frøseth for generous 
support. A.A-.G. acknowledges the generous support of Natural Resources Canada and the 
Canada 150 Research Chairs program. 
 
References 
[1] 
Y. Cui, H. Yao, J. Zhang, T. Zhang, Y. Wang, L. Hong, K. Xian, B. Xu, S. Zhang, J. 
Peng, Z. Wei, F. Gao, J. Hou, Nat. Commun. 2019, 10, 1. 
[2] 
X. Liu, Y. Yan, Y. Yao, Z. Liang, Adv. Funct. Mater. 2018, 28, DOI 
10.1002/adfm.201802004. 
[3] 
K. Li, Y. Wu, Y. Tang, M. Pan, W. Ma, H. Fu, C. Zhan, J. Yao, Adv. Energy Mater. 
2019, 1901728, 1901728. 
[4] 
R. A. Potyrailo, B. J. Chisholm, W. G. Morris, J. N. Cawse, W. P. Flanagan, L. Hassib, 
C. A. Molaison, K. Ezbiansky, G. Medford, H. Reitz, J. Comb. Chem. 2003, 5, 472. 
[5] 
D. G. Anderson, S. Levenberg, R. Langer, Nat. Biotechnol. 2004, 22, 863. 
[6] 
A. Jaklenec, A. C. Anselmo, J. Hong, A. J. Vegas, M. Kozminsky, R. Langer, P. T. 
Hammond, D. G. Anderson, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces 2016, 8, 2255. 

[7] 
X. Rodríguez-Martínez, A. Sánchez-Díaz, G. Liu, M. A. Niño, J. Cabanillas-Gonzalez, 
M. Campoy-Quiles, Org. Electron. physics, Mater. Appl. 2018, 59, 288. 
[8] 
A. Sánchez-Díaz, X. Rodríguez-Martínez, L. Córcoles-Guija, G. Mora-Martín, M. 
Campoy-Quiles, Adv. Electron. Mater. 2018, 4, DOI 10.1002/aelm.201700477. 
[9] 
A. Teichler, J. Perelaer, U. S. Schubert, Mater. Res. Soc. Symp. Proc. 2012, 1390, 103. 
[10] D. P. Tabor, L. M. Roch, S. K. Saikin, C. Kreisbeck, D. Sheberla, J. H. Montoya, S. 
Dwaraknath, M. Aykol, C. Ortiz, H. Tribukait, C. Amador-Bedolla, C. J. Brabec, B. 
Maruyama, K. A. Persson, A. Aspuru-Guzik, Nat. Rev. Mater. 2018, 3, 5. 
[11] J. P. Correa-Baena, K. Hippalgaonkar, J. van Duren, S. Jaffer, V. R. Chandrasekhar, V. 
Stevanovic, C. Wadia, S. Guha, T. Buonassisi, Joule 2018, 2, 1410. 
[12] A. Aspuru-Guzik, K. Persson, Mission Innov. Innov. Chall. 6 2018. 
[13] K. T. Butler, D. W. Davies, H. Cartwright, O. Isayev, A. Walsh, Nature 2018, 559, 
547. 
[14] H. Winicov, J. Schainbaum, J. Buckley, G. Longino, J. Hill, C. E. Berkoff, Anal. Chim. 
Acta 1978, 103, 469. 
[15] P. Nikolaev, D. Hooper, F. Webber, R. Rao, K. Decker, M. Krein, J. Poleski, R. Barto, 
B. Maruyama, npj Comput. Mater. 2016, 2, DOI 10.1038/npjcompumats.2016.31. 
[16] D. Xue, P. V. Balachandran, J. Hogden, J. Theiler, D. Xue, T. Lookman, Nat. Commun. 
2016, 7, 1. 
[17] J. M. Granda, L. Donina, V. Dragone, D. L. Long, L. Cronin, Nature 2018, 559, 377. 
[18] P. J. Kitson, G. Marie, J.-P. Francoia, S. S. Zalesskiy, R. C. Sigerson, J. S. Mathieson, 
L. Cronin, Science (80-. ). 2018, 359, 314. 

[19] B. P. MacLeod, F. G. L. Parlane, T. D. Morrissey, F. Häse, L. M. Roch, K. E. 
Dettelbach, R. Moreira, L. P. E. Yunker, M. B. Rooney, J. R. Deeth, V. Lai, G. J. Ng, 
H. Situ, R. H. Zhang, A. Aspuru-Guzik, J. E. Hein, C. P. Berlinguette, arXiv 2019, 
arXiv:1906.05398. 
[20] X. Du, T. Heumueller, W. Gruber, A. Classen, T. Unruh, N. Li, C. J. Brabec, Joule 
2019, 3, 215. 
[21] A. Distler, P. Kutka, T. Sauermann, H. J. Egelhaaf, D. M. Guldi, D. Di Nuzzo, S. C. J. 
Meskers, R. A. J. Janssen, Chem. Mater. 2012, 24, 4397. 
[22] E. T. Hoke, I. T. Sachs-Quintana, M. T. Lloyd, I. Kauvar, W. R. Mateker, A. M. 
Nardes, C. H. Peters, N. Kopidakis, M. D. McGehee, Adv. Energy Mater. 2012, 2, 
1351. 
[23] M. Salvador, N. Gasparini, J. D. Perea, S. H. Paleti, A. Distler, L. N. Inasaridze, P. A. 
Troshin, L. Lüer, H. J. Egelhaaf, C. Brabec, Energy Environ. Sci. 2017, 10, 2005. 
[24] C. Zhang, T. Heumueller, S. Leon, W. Gruber, K. Burlafinger, X. Tang, J. D. Perea, I. 
Wabra, A. Hirsch, T. Unruh, N. Li, C. J. Brabec, Energy Environ. Sci. 2019, 12, 1078. 
[25] S. Chen, Y. Hou, H. Chen, X. Tang, S. Langner, N. Li, T. Stubhan, I. Levchuk, E. Gu, 
A. Osvet, C. J. Brabec, Adv. Energy Mater. 2018, 8, 1. 
[26] C. Xie, X. Tang, M. Berlinghof, S. Langner, S. Chen, A. Späth, N. Li, R. H. Fink, T. 
Unruh, C. J. Brabec, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces 2018, 10, 23225. 
[27] L. M. Roch, F. Häse, C. Kreisbeck, T. Tamayo-Mendoza, L. P. E. Yunker, J. E. Hein, 
A. Aspuru-Guzik, Chemrxiv 2018, 10.26434/chemrxiv.5952655. 
[28] L. M. Roch, F. Häse, C. Kreisbeck, T. Tamayo-Mendoza, L. P. E. Yunker, J. E. Hein, 

A. Aspuru-Guzik, Sci. Robot. 2018, 3, eaat5559. 
[29] F. Häse, L. M. Roch, C. Kreisbeck, A. Aspuru-Guzik, ACS Cent. Sci. 2018, 4, 1134. 
[30] F. Häse, L. M. Roch, A. Aspuru-Guzik, Chem. Sci. 2018, 9, 7642. 
[31] Https://github.com/aspuru-guzik-group/quaterny_opvs, 2019. 
 
 
TOC: 
 
 
 
 
 
 

Supporting Information 
 
S.1    Experiment planning with robotics constraints 
 
The robotic system for blend formulation has a finite dispensing accuracy of approximately 1 
µL (see main text). As such, the blend compositions realized by the automated platform can 
differ from the blend formulations suggested by ChemOS. Specifically, the robotic system 
could, by chance, prepare two polymer blends with almost identical compositions, which 
ultimately results in the repetition of a previous experiment. Here, we aim to accelerate the 
discovery of photostable polymer blends. Hence, redundant experiments need to be avoided 
and a more uniform coverage of the search space is required. To this end, we constructed a 
high-resolution grid of possible parameter points where any two blend compositions can be 
realized distinguishably by the automated platform despite the finite dispensing accuracy. 
Given the dispensing accuracy of 2 wt.-% (1 µL), the high-resolution grid was constructed 
with 19,317 different parameter points. 
 
We extended ChemOS by an additional module to transform continuous experimental 
parameters suggested by the experiment planner to the grid of distinguishable experiments 
which the automated platform can realize. Note that ChemOS’ modular architecture enables 
the simplified integration of this extra step in the self-driving approach without interfering with 
existing modules. This additional module extends an iteration of the self-driving approach as 
follows. (i) ChemOS first calls the experiment planner, which was chosen to be Phoenics for 
this application, to receive a set of continuous experimental parameters suggested based on 
previous measurements. (ii) Then, the suggested parameters are projected onto the grid of 
distinguishable experiments, using the Euclidean metric. (iii) Finally, the identified closest 
grid point is suggested as the next experiment and sent to the robotic system. Step (ii) 
constitutes an addition to the conventional self-driving approach. Note, that the experiment 
planner is still updated with measurements associated to the experimental conditions it 
proposed, as opposed to the grid parameters which were realized. This policy ensures that 
the robotic space and the application space on which the experiment planner operates are 
well defined and kept separate.  
In the self-driving approach, we employed two different merit functions in two different 
executions to quantitatively rank individual blend compositions. While in the first execution 
the obtained photodegradation measurement served directly as the merit, the second 
execution targeted a minimization of the logarithm of the photodegradation measurement.   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

S.2    Results of high-throughput experimentation and self-driving laboratory 
 
 
Figure S1. Front view of our semi-automatic robot system: (1) robot arm with four pipetting channels up to 1 mL 
each; (2) spectrometer with Abs and PL mode; (3) two hotplates; (4) different sizes of tips; (5) stock solutions for 
experiment; (6) 96-well microplates as experiment-vessels; (7) waste container for tips; (8) heat sealer to fuse 
microplates with aluminum foils. 
 
 
 
Figure S3A. Fresh films compared to aged films after 18 hours of continuous illumination. 
2 
8 
7 
4 
1 
3 
6 
5 
3 

 
Figure S3B. Overview of a subset from all the samples prepared and characterized in this study. 
 
 
Figure S3. Reproducibility of the high-throughput drop-casting film formation. 
 
 
 

 
Figure S4. Stability of the materials used in this study. PCBM has a negative value due to slight increase of the 
spectra. 
 
 
 
Figure S5. Stability graphs of binary and ternary mixtures for PBQ-QF based system (left) and PTB7-Th based 
system (right). 
 

 
Figure S6. Stability graphs of quaternary mixtures for PBQ-QF based system (top) and PTB7-Th based system 
(bottom). 
 
 
 
 
 
 

Table S1. The 10 best compositions found by the self-driving approach and grid-HTE. 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure S7. Comparison between grid-based high-throughput experimentation and ChemOS optimization for the 
PBQ-QF based system. Here each data point is distance related to the best found HTE composition (         
√               ). 
 
 

Figure S8. Tetrahedral plot of the most stable (blue points) and most unstable (green/red points) compositions. 
The dataset includes data points from both strategies, HTE and SDA. 
 
 
Figure S9. A) Performances of high-throughput experimentation (red traces) and ChemOS/Phoenics (blue traces) 
on the virtual robots related to the PBQ-QF based system. Note that the traces were averaged over 10,000 
independent grid samplings and 200 independent ChemOS optimizations. B) Top: Statistical output of the virtual 
robot showing the acceleration of SDA over HTE; Bottom: Confidence to improve on HTE within given budget of 
30 or 60 samples. Both are related to the PBQ-QF based system. 
 
 
 
 

S.3    Construction of virtual robots 
 
The statistical significance of the experimentally obtained performance difference between 
the self-driving approach and high-throughput experimentation (HTE) was assessed in detail 
with the construction of virtual robots. Virtual robots can be designed via probabilistic 
machine learning (ML) models to emulate an experimental procedure in silico.[1] Assuming 
that the virtual robot reproduces the measurements of previous experiments sufficiently well, 
the merit of new experiments can be estimated computationally without conducting further 
experiments. Consequently, virtual robots can serve as a benchmark to determine 
performance differences between different experiment planning strategies.  
 
We construct virtual robots from Bayesian neural networks (BNNs) which are trained to 
reproduce the photo-degradation measured for individual polymer blends in the HTE 
approach. BNNs constitute probabilistic ML models which can be trained via variational 
expectation maximization in a Bayesian framework. Thus, BNNs are intrinsically robust to 
overfitting and can infer both the expected photo-degradation and the degree of experimental 
noise to resemble experimental conditions. The applicability of BNNs to emulate experiments 
has already been demonstrated in the context of modelling high-performance liquid 
chromatography signals.1 
 
A total of 850 experiments (81.7%) were randomly selected from the 1,041 HTE experiments 
for both blend systems to train BNNs with 5-fold cross-validation. The remaining 190 
experiments (18.3%) were used as a test set to determine the generalization performance of 
the trained BNNs. BNNs were constructed as fully connected feedforward networks with 
three hidden layers. To account for the fact that the photo-degradation of any given polymer 
blend cannot be negative, we selected ReLU activation functions for the output layer. 
Weights 
and 
biases 
were 
modelled 
with 
Gaussian 
priors. 
Additional 
network 
hyperparameters and the selected values are reported in Table S2. 
 
Table S2: Hyperparameters for the Bayesian neural networks used as virtual robots to emulate the photo-
degradation of individual polymer blends. 
Hyperparameter 
Selected value 
Number of hidden layers 
3 
Neurons per hidden layer 120 
Hidden layer activations 
Leaky ReLU 
Learning rate 
0.001 
Dropout rate 
0.2 
 
Both polymer blend ratios and associated photo-degradations were rescaled prior to being 
presented to the BNNs. Polymer blend ratios were transformed from the 4-simplex,   , to the 
three-dimensional unit cube, while individual photo-degradations were divided by the 
average photo-degradation taken over the 850 experiments used for cross-validation. 
 
Prediction accuracies for the BNNs trained on the two blend systems are illustrated in Figure 
S10 We observe that the BNNs are capable of reproducing the experimental measurements 
of the test sets with coefficients of determination of 0.88 (0.87) on the PBQ-QF (PTB7-Th) 
blend system. The agreement of coefficients of determination between the test and the 
training sets indicates good transferability of the BNNs. 

 
 
  PBQ-QF System  
 
  PTB7-Th System 
 
Figure S10: Prediction accuracies of the virtual robots constructed from Bayesian neural networks on the two 
studied blend systems. Predicted photo-degradations are compared to measurements obtained from high-
throughput experimentation.  
 
S.4     Statistical analysis of virtual robot optimizations 
 
The expected benefits of the self-driving approach over conventional HTE are determined 
from simulations on the virtual robot constructed in Sec. S.3. 
 
In a first comparison, we estimate the number of experiments required for ChemOS to 
discover a polymer blend which is at least as photostable as the average most photostable 
blend discovered with HTE (884 experiments in total, averaged over 10,000 independent 
repetitions). The average number of experiments is computed from the 200 independent 
ChemOS optimization traces, and confidence bands (68% and 95%) are estimated with 
bootstrapping. In addition, we assess the expected performance of a single optimization run 
by bootstrapping confidence bands (68% and 95%) for a single trace. Results are illustrated 
in the manuscript (see Figure 3). Note that ChemOS required fewer experiments to locate 
polymer blends which are more photostable than the average most photostable blend 
identified in HTE in all 200 iterations. 
 
Based on the estimated number of experiments, we further compute the acceleration of the 
experimentation campaign, relating the number of HTE experiments to the number of 
ChemOS experiments. Confidence bands are calculated as before. Further, we estimate the 
probability of ChemOS having identified a more photostable blend than HTE for a given 
budget. This probability is computed based on the number of times a ChemOS trace located 
a more photostable blend than a given HTE trace after a certain number of experiments. The 
probability is then averaged over all HTE traces.  
 
 
 
 
 
S.5     Experimental 

 
Materials: 
Chlorobenzene (99%) was purchased from Alfa Aesar [USA]. oIDTBR and PTB7-Th were 
ordered from 1-material [USA]. P3HT and PCBM were provided by Merck KGaA [Germany] 
and Solenne BV [Netherlands], respectively. PBQ-QF was purchased from Advent 
Technologies Inc. [Greece]. 
Multi-well substrates:  
The patterning of 96 wells on top of a glass substrate (125x85 mm²) is performed with a 
dispensing robot [I&J 4100-LF, Fisnar Inc., USA] using an UV-curable adhesive [DELO LP 
655, DELO Industrie Klebstoffe GmbH & Co. KGaA, Germany], which is cured for 5 min 
under UV light [UVACUBE 100, Dr. Hönle AG, Germany]. 
Characterization and degradation:  
Absorbance measurements (300-800 nm, 5 nm increment) were performed with a microplate 
reader [Infinity m200-Pro; Tecan Group AG, Switzerland]. The samples were then degraded 
under ambient conditions with a metal-halide lamp of one sun intensity for 18 hours before 
the absorbance spectra were recorded again. The absorbance loss was calculated by 
subtracting the aged from the fresh spectrum and integrating the resulting differences across 
all wavelengths.  
 
 
 
 
References 
[1] 
F. Häse, L. M. Roch, A. Aspuru-Guzik, Chem. Sci. 2018, 9, 7642. 
 
 
