 
Pair-Variational Autoencoders (PairVAE) for Linking and 
Cross-Reconstruction of Characterization Data from 
Complementary Structural Characterization Techniques 
 Shizhao Lu1, Arthi Jayaraman1,2* 
Affiliations 
1
Department of Chemical and Biomolecular Engineering, University of Delaware, Newark, DE 19716 
2
Department of Materials Science and Engineering, University of Delaware, Newark, DE 19716 
 
ABSTRACT 
In materials research, structural characterization often requires multiple complementary techniques to 
obtain a holistic morphological view of the synthesized material. Depending on the availability and 
accessibility of the different characterization techniques (e.g., scattering, microscopy, spectroscopy), each 
research facility or academic research lab may have access to high-throughput capability in one technique 
but face limitations (sample preparation, resolution, access time) with other technique(s). Furthermore, one 
type of structural characterization data may be easier to interpret than another (e.g., microscopy images are 
easier to interpret than small angle scattering profiles). Thus, it is useful to have machine learning models 
that can be trained on paired structural characterization data from multiple techniques (easy and difficult to 
interpret, fast and slow in data collection or sample preparation), so that the model can generate one set of 
characterization data from the other. In this paper we demonstrate one such machine learning workflow, 
PairVAE, that works with data from Small Angle X-Ray Scattering (SAXS) that presents information about 
bulk morphology and images from Scanning Electron Microscopy (SEM) that presents two-dimensional 
local structural information of the sample. Using paired SAXS and SEM data of newly observed block 
copolymer assembled morphologies [open access data from Doerk G.S., et al. Science Advances. 2023 Jan 
13;9(2): eadd3687], we train our PairVAE. After successful training, we demonstrate that the PairVAE can 
generate SEM images of the block copolymer morphology when it takes as input that sample’s 
corresponding SAXS 2D pattern, and vice versa. This method can be extended to other soft materials 
morphologies as well and serves as a valuable tool for easy interpretation of 2D SAXS patterns as well as 
an engine for generating ensembles of similar microscopy images to create a database for other downstream 
calculations of structure-property relationships.  
 

INTRODUCTION 
Machine learning and artificial intelligence are becoming invaluable methods that enable faster discovery, 
innovation, and automation in chemical and material sciences and engineering.1-10 In particular, machine 
learning has found tremendous use in automating materials’ structural analysis which is a vital step in 
establishing the design-structure-property relationship of a novel material.11-21 For example, structural 
characterization of materials often depend of microscopy imaging techniques (e.g., scanning electron 
microscopy or SEM, transmission electron microscopy or TEM, atomic force microscopy or AFM) to 
visualize nanoscale or microscale structural features or patterns.22 Deep learning models used for pattern 
recognition and image analysis have been adopted as a viable means to automatically extract structural from 
microscopy images information regarding the ordered arrangements of the molecules, type of ordered 
assembly, and detection of objects’ (e.g., nanoparticles, assembled domains) shapes and sizes.23-35 There 
are unique challenges, however, with training machine learning models that are used for everyday 
photographic image analysis to analyze materials’ microscopy images. For example, compared to 
photographic images of everyday objects that often are easily recognizable, materials’ microscopy images 
require detailed metadata of the material, chemistry, synthesis conditions, imaging process conditions as 
labels. The richness of metadata associated with each microscopy image also implies limitation on the 
curation of large microscopy databases because a generic (universal) labeling scheme would be nearly 
impossible for microscopy images coming from diverse sources. Furthermore, a unique problem to (non-
biological) materials field is the smaller dataset sizes for the microscopy images collected from samples 
due to the laborious sample preparation required to acquire each image; this problem restricts the use of 
deep learning models that require large training datasets like those available in biomedical fields.36, 37  To 
address this challenge with small materials’ microscopy image datasets, Lu et al.38 recently proposed a 
semi-supervised transfer learning workflow that successfully classified the materials’ morphologies from 
transmission electron microscopy images of protein/peptide nanowires despite being trained with less than 
ten labeled images per morphology.  
Another machine learning approach that can be applied to the small and highly 
chemistry/material/processing specific microscopy image datasets is generative machine learning. 
Generative machine learning models are trained to reconstruct outputs that resemble the inputs, where the 
input could be two-dimensional images, three-dimensional structure, graph of a chemical structure of a 
molecule, a x-y plot, etc. One specific type of generative machine learning model is an autoencoder that 
can learn reconstruction of complex input data and/or obtain concise, low-dimensional latent space 
representations of the complex input data. An autoencoder consists of an encoder that encodes information 
from the input data to a set of lower dimensional latent variables and a decoder that decodes information 

from a set of latent variables back to the same number of dimensions as the input data. An autoencoder is 
typically trained by minimizing the mismatch (i.e., loss) between the reconstructed data and the input data. 
Material scientists have applied autoencoders for multiple purposes such as reconstruction of experimental 
characterization data39-46, molecular structure47-50 or microscopy image41, 46, 51, 52; clustering53, 54 and/or 
classification42, 43, 45, 48 of the latent space representations; obtaining material design parameters39, 40 or 
deriving order parameters55-59 from latent space representations; molecular47 or material52 property 
optimization based on the latent space representations. Some of the studies mentioned here43-48, 50, 52, 53, 57 
used a modified version of the autoencoder called variational autoencoder60 (VAE) which maps the 
encoded latent space to a multidimensional standard Gaussian distribution, that has the benefit of 
continuous latent space compared to the sparse latent space that one would get from the encodings of an 
unmodified autoencoder. In a recent study Yaman et al.46  demonstrated a dual VAE machine learning 
workflow that can be used to couple the surface photonic response spectroscopy (SPR) profiles and SEM  
images of gold nanoparticles. They have shown that by correlating the latent space of one VAE trained on 
SPR with the latent space of another VAE trained on SEM, they can correctly generate (or construct) SPR 
profile from a corresponding SEM image or vice versa. 
In this article, partly inspired by the work of Yaman et al., we present a machine learning workflow 
called ‘PairVAE’ that can enable cross-reconstruction and cross-generation of complementary 
characterization data of soft materials. As a proof-of-concept, we demonstrate that PairVAE can reconstruct 
either Small Angle X-ray Scattering (SAXS) patterns or SEM images of block copolymer morphologies 
from the other type of characterization data with a limited number of training data of pairs of SAXS and 
SEM. For interested readers, in Table. S1 we compare and contrast our PairVAE work (in terms of purpose, 
data domain, dataset format, model training protocol) against the work of Yaman et al.46 that served as an 
inspiration to us. As our work in this paper uses block copolymer morphologies as an example for 
demonstrating PairVAE, we discuss briefly about block copolymers and the types of information one 
obtains by conducting SAXS and SEM measurements on them.  
Block copolymers (BCPs) are polymers made up of two or more types of monomers with repeating 
sequences of different monomers. The self-assembly or directed assembly of BCPs in films or in solutions 
generates rich ordered morphologies including spheres, cylinders, lamellae, gyroids, vesicles, and other 
bicontinuous structures.61-64 For melts of a simple linear diblock copolymer with two immiscible monomer 
chemistries, past studies using theory, simulations, and experiments have all shown self-assembly into four 
canonical -  lamella, cylinder, spheres, and gyroid – ordered BCP morphologies by varying BCP 
composition and/or temperature or Flory-Huggins χ parameter (an indicator of immiscibility of the two 
monomers in the BCP).65-67 In experiments, these BCP morphologies are most commonly characterized by 

complementary experimental techniques: Small-Angle X-ray or Neutron Scattering (SAXS or SANS) and 
Transmission Electron Microscopy (TEM) or Scanning Electron Microscopy (SEM). The full two-
dimensional SAXS pattern quantifies the degree of positional and orientational order present in the BCP 
morphology over a range of length scales (inverse wavevector q). The azimuthally averaged one-
dimensional SAXS or SANS scattering intensity 𝐼(𝑞) versus scattering wavevector 𝑞 is used to quantify 
the BCP domain spacing. In contrast, SEM or TEM images provide two-dimensional visualization of BCP 
morphologies at specific length scales. Unlike the SAXS and SANS patterns (2D or 1D) that provide 
average structural information of the bulk sample, SEM or TEM images for the same material can differ 
from sample to sample due to selection of the imaging region, differences of magnification/contrast, and 
existence of defects in the domains over the sample. While SAXS has the benefit of outputting statistical 
average or bulk structure information over multiple length scales, the data in wavevector 𝑞 space is abstract 
and requires non-trivial work in interpretation using analytical models68, 69 or advanced computational 
techniques15, 19, 70. Unlike SAXS or SANS profiles that are harder to analyze and prone to incorrect 
interpretation if one fits with analytical models that are either approximate or inapplicable for the structure 
at hand, the SEM or TEM images are real-space visualization and less prone to incorrect interpretation. 
Thus, having both sets of results can provide unambiguous interpretation of the structure in the BCP system 
at various length scales. One could in principle apply fast Fourier transform on an SEM image to obtain a 
SAXS-like scattering pattern albeit with worse statistics than that obtained from SAXS measurement; 
furthermore, generation of local real-space SEM morphology representations from a SAXS pattern has not 
been reported in literature. Therefore, having a machine learning model that can couple/pair complementary 
SAXS and SEM results will be valuable as it can overcome the individual limitations/challenges for either 
approach. We describe our machine learning workflow, ‘PairVAE’, for linking and cross-reconstruction of 
2D SAXS pattern and SEM images that provide complementary information about soft materials’ 
morphologies. 
METHOD 
Our machine learning workflow ‘PairVAE’ for cross-reconstruction of two types of complementary 
characterizations, 2D SAXS pattern and SEM image, was trained on paired SAXS and SEM data of BCP 
morphologies reported recently by Doerk et al.71 They used blends of two BCPs both with polystyrene (PS) 
and poly(methyl methacrylate) (PMMA) blocks but with varying composition; one BCP was a lamellae 
forming symmetric PS-b-PMMA and the other BCP was cylinder forming PMMA-minority PS-b-
PMMA.72 These BCP blends were assembled into unique morphologies using template-directed assembly 
by varying the width of the substrate pattern.71 For each of these morphologies, the authors presented 
complementary characterization data in the form of 2D SAXS patterns and SEM images.  Fig. 1 shows 

representative 2D SAXS pattern and SEM image for each of the four morphologies they observed. 
“Hexagonal” morphology consists of cylinder-like domains (bright dots and dim vertical lines) and lamella-
like domains (bright vertical lines) in the SEM images with regular domain spacing. The authors noted that 
the “skew”, “alternating lines”, and “ladders” morphologies were not seen in previous studies. “Skew” 
morphology consists of bilayers of lamella-like domains at the air-interface with cylinder-like domains at 
the template-interface. “Alternating lines” morphology consists of vertical intercalating lines of bright 
lamella-like domains and dim cylinder-like domains while “ladders” morphology consists of oblong shapes 
with lamella-like domains parallel to the template grating direction and cylinder-like domain orthogonal to 
the template grating direction. In their work, SAXS was the high-throughput technique while the SEM 
characterization was slower and laborious and considered a bottleneck in their production of this paired 
characterization data. Their open-access dataset is tremendously useful for training and testing of a machine 
learning workflow like our PairVAE that can cross-reconstruct SEM (bottleneck method but easier to 
interpret) images from SAXS (high-throughput method but harder to interpret) data, and vice versa.   
 
Fig. 1. Representative characterization data of four different morphologies observed with a mixture of 
lamella-forming and cylinder-forming PS-PMMA BCPs assembled on a chemical grating template. The 
images in column A, column B, and column C are example SAXS pattern, randomly cropped SEM image, 
and annotated SEM image for each of the four morphologies. In the annotated images, green dashed lines 
indicate examples of lamella-like domains, blue arrows and dotted lines indicate cylinder-like domains. 
The white scale bar denoting 500 nm in (“skew” figure B) applies to all SEMs without scale bars. The full 
SEM images of the four morphologies are presented in figure S1. All of these SAXS and full SEM images 
were obtained from the open-access block copolymers characterization dataset by Doerk et al. Science 

Advances. 2023 Jan 13;9(2): eadd3687: SAXS dataset DOI: https://doi.org/10.18126/qboh-6fav and SEM 
dataset DOI: https://doi.org/10.18126/09ow-8g8k 
 
‘PairVAE’ is comprised of two sets of variational autoencoders (VAE). Before the two sets of 
encoders and decoders in the two VAE are trained together to handle cross-reconstruction, each VAE is 
first trained on one type of characterization data through solo training as shown in Fig. 2A. We first describe 
briefly the dataset and the preprocessing of the characterization data used in these training steps. 
We obtained 72 pairs of SAXS and SEM characterization data from their open-access data 
depository that were imaged at the same position in the larger grating template with the knowledge that the 
perception field of SAXS is larger than the SEM image. For SAXS data, we use the 2D SAXS pattern 
images resized to 192 × 192 pixels for training and reconstruction. For SEM data, the full SEM images are 
830 × 1280 pixels with examples shown in Fig. S1, however, we do not use the full SEM images as our 
input for two reasons. One reason is that the different morphologies are visually distinguishable at smaller 
regions than the full SEM but less distinguishable with the full SEM image. The second reason is that the 
convolutional neural network (CNN) models that we use to process images work well with image size ~256 
× 256 pixels and smaller. We preprocess the full SEM images with adaptive thresholding73 to obtain 
binarized versions of the SEM images with better delineation of the PMMA domains vs. PS domains. We 
have found adaptive thresholding much better at delineation of PMMA vs. PS domains of SEMs exhibiting 
the “alternating lines” or the “ladders” morphology compared to other thresholding methods described in 
Fig. S2.  
 

 
Fig. 2. Schematics of our PairVAE workflow. A. First, solo training of VAEs for SAXS and SEM images 
separately. B. Pair training of VAEs with SAXS and SEM images concurrently with additional loss functions 
beyond those used in solo VAEs. PairVAE has four reconstruction capabilities: SAXS profiles from SAXS 
input (denoted as SAXS→ SAXS in the text), SAXS profiles from SEM input (i.e., SEM→ SAXS), SEM 
images from SEM input (SEM→ SEM), and SEM images from SAXS input (SAXS→ SEM).  
During training of SEM encoder and decoder, we randomly crop a 192 × 192 section of the full 
SEM at each training epoch and reconstruct the cropped section. Randomly cropping is an effective data 
augmentation approach for our small-size dataset. For SEM images, we do not expect pixel-to-pixel exact 
reconstruction from our decoder based on our knowledge of the high statistical variance of image 
representations belonging to the same morphology. For SEM images, we instead aim for morphologically 
similar reconstructions of the input image and have applied quantitative metrics to quantify the similarity 
in morphology: 2-point correlation function and lineal path function. The 2-point correlation function 𝑆(𝑟) 
gives us both the pixel density of the PMMA domains at various positions (radial distance r) and the degree 
of positional order through the oscillations in 𝑆(𝑟). The lineal path function tells us the probability 
distribution of the length of line segments in PMMA domains along a path. If done along the vertical axis, 
 
 
     
       
     
       
    
       
    
       
       
     
       
     
         
          
     
              
            
            
     
              
           
           
       
     
       
     

the lineal path function indicates the degree of connectivity of the PMMA domains in the vertical direction; 
similarly lineal path function can be done along the horizontal path. These two metrics are only used as 
performance assessment of the reconstructed SEMs (after a model has been trained) and were not calculated 
or inferred in any way during training. The morphological metrics were calculated with the Porespy 
package74. A lower dimensional latent space is obtained through solo training of each VAE as well as 
reconstructions of the input characterization data. 
 In the second part, i.e., pair training, we train the encoders and decoders of the two VAEs in tandem 
by maximizing the similarity of the two latent spaces as shown in Fig. 2B. Additional cross-reconstruction 
training losses are established to enable cross-reconstruction capabilities of one type of characterization 
data from another. We note that while solo training is reconstruction of SAXS or SEM in their respective 
space, pair training attempts to bridge the two different data spaces and tackle the many-to-one (SEM-to-
SAXS) and one-to-many (SAXS-to-SEM) cross-reconstruction problems. In selection of training protocols, 
we find that different from solo training, random cropping of SEM images every epoch during training 
renders the SEM decoder untrainable as shown by the unabating losses in Fig. S3.D and E. Therefore, we 
adopt a two-part training protocol for pair training with a first part of multiple random cropping SEM 
sessions and a second part focusing on reconstruction on one randomly cropped SEM instance. A detailed 
description of the VAE models employed, training protocols of both solo VAE training and pair VAE 
training is in the Supporting Information.  
RESULTS and DISCUSSION 
First, in Fig. 3A, we show the results of solo trained VAE (i.e., a VAE generating SEM image from SEM 
image and a VAE generating a SAXS pattern from a SAXS pattern). We include one example of the true 
and reconstructed SAXS pattern and SEM image for each of the four morphologies obtained with solo 
trained VAE; we note that the selected images are from validation sets and are not seen during training. We 
observe that the SAXS reconstructions using the solo trained SAXS VAE exhibit a good match with their 
true counterparts. For SEM reconstructions, we observe only partial resemblance to the true SEM images. 
For the “skew” and “ladders” morphologies, their SEM reconstructions are visually different than their true 
SEM images. In Fig. 3B, we show the calculated 𝑆(𝑟) of PMMA domains along radial distance and the 
vertical lineal path function of PMMA domains for each true and reconstructed SEM image in Fig. 3A. In 
our case, as the chemical grating direction is vertical, the vertical lineal path function has more features. 
The horizontal lineal path functions are provided in Fig. S4. For all four morphologies’ examples, the 
reconstructed SEMs pixel density of PMMA domains are higher by a small margin with that of the “ladders” 
morphology being the most different. Reconstructions of both “hexagonal” and “alternating lines” 

morphologies can capture the spatial order of the PMMA domains indicated as having the similar period of 
oscillation in 𝑆(𝑟) as the 𝑆(𝑟) of the true SEM images but give slightly higher lineal path function 
compared to that of the true SEM images. For the “skew” morphology, the reconstruction does not capture 
longer range positional order of the true SEM image. As the “ladders” morphology has more statistical 
variance in the sample, it is not surprising that it is harder to reconstruct “ladders” morphology than the 
other three morphologies. Additionally, unlike the other three morphologies where the PMMA domains 
occupy full line segments or dots, in the “ladders” morphology, the PMMA domains reside on the periphery 
of the ladders. Furthermore, the highly non-uniform shape of the ladders indicates that the domains formed 
by different ladder peripherals are also non-uniform.  
 
Fig. 3. Reconstruction performance of solo trained VAE. A. Examples of SAXS and SEM reconstructions 
for images from the validation set of the solo trained VAE. B. Variation of 2-point correlation functions 
𝑆(𝑟) of PMMA domains along radial distance and vertical lineal path functions of PMMA domains.  

 
Next, in Fig. 4A, we show the reconstructions from pair trained VAE of the same examples that 
we showed in Fig. 3A (which were obtained with solo trained VAE). We observe in Fig. 4A that SAXS 
reconstruction from SAXS input (denoted as ‘SAXS→SAXS’) with pair trained VAE is worse than that 
using solo trained SAXS VAE (Fig. 3A). We also observe that SAXS reconstruction from SEM input 
(denoted as ‘SEM→SAXS’) is comparable to SAXS reconstruction from SAXS input (i.e., SAXS→SAXS) 
with pair trained VAE. For SEM reconstruction from SAXS input (denoted as ‘SAXS→SEM’), for all four 
morphologies, the reconstructed SEM images are visually more similar to the true SEM images than the 
SEM→SEM reconstructions with the pair trained VAE. In general, Fig. 4A shows that by pairing SAXS 
with SEM in pair trained VAE, we have improved the SEM reconstruction and deteriorated SAXS 
reconstruction as compared to their solo trained VAE (Fig. 3A). This unexpected result will be explained 
below based on latent space complexity in the paragraph after the discussion of results in Fig. 4B. 
 

Fig. 4. Reconstruction performance of pair trained VAE. A. Examples of SAXS and SEM reconstructions 
for images from the validation set with pair trained VAE. B. Variation of 2-point correlation functions of 
PMMA domains along radial distance and vertical lineal path functions of PMMA domains.  
While the conclusions from Fig. 4A are purely based on visual comparisons, in Fig. 4B we provide 
a quantitative comparison of the SEM reconstructions against the true SEM for both SEM→SEM and 
SAXS→SEM, using the two metrics described in the method section – 2-point correlation functions and 
vertical linear path functions. The horizontal lineal path functions are provided in Fig. S5.  
For the “hexagonal” morphology, the 2-point correlation function 𝑆(𝑟) for SAXS→SEM 
reconstruction closely matches the 𝑆(𝑟) of the true SEM image, while SEM→SEM reconstruction has 
slightly higher 𝑆(𝑟), and does not capture the shape of the 𝑆(𝑟) in the true SEM image. Similarly, the 
vertical lineal path function of SAXS→SEM reconstruction is closer to the true SEM image than the 
SEM→SEM is, however the vertical lineal path function of SAXS→SEM reconstruction is slightly higher 
than the true SEM image due to more occurrences of lines than the true SEM image. The SEM→SEM 
reconstruction’s vertical lineal path function is lower than the true SEM image due to more broken-up line 
segments in the reconstructed image.  
For the “skew” morphology, the 𝑆(𝑟) of the SAXS→SEM reconstruction follows the oscillations 
of 𝑆(𝑟) of the true SEM image closely albeit with slightly lower values indicating slightly lower pixel 
density of PMMA domains in the SAXS→SEM reconstruction. The 𝑆(𝑟) of the SEM→SEM 
reconstruction captures the mean of the oscillating 𝑆(𝑟) well but does not capture the shape of the 𝑆(𝑟). 
Both SEM→SEM and SAXS→SEM reconstructed “skew” images have lineal path function closely 
matching that of the true SEM image.  
For the “alternating lines” morphology, the 𝑆(𝑟) of both SEM→SEM and SAXS→SEM 
reconstructions have oscillating period like that of the true SEM image. However, both reconstructed 𝑆(𝑟) 
curves are higher than that of the true SEM image. Commenting on the reconstructions of the “alternating 
lines” morphology in Fig. 4A., the mismatch in the 𝑆(𝑟) is likely due to inability to accurately reconstruct 
the minor dotted region in the true SEM image. The lineal path function of SAXS→SEM reconstruction 
shows a larger proportion of longer line segments while that of SEM→SEM reconstruction gives smaller 
probability values overall due to more broken-up line segments.  
For the “ladders” morphology, the 𝑆(𝑟) of both SEM→SEM and SAXS→SEM reconstructions are 
still off from that of true SEM image but much better than that of the solo trained SEM reconstruction 
shown in Fig. 3B. The lineal path function of the SAXS→SEM reconstruction is a close match with that of 
the true SEM image.  

The takeaway message so far is that pair training enables cross-reconstruction from either SAXS 
→ SEM or from SEM → SAXS data. Compared with solo trained VAE (results in Fig. 3), pair trained 
VAE (results in Fig. 4) improves SEM reconstruction performance while the SAXS reconstruction 
performance becomes slightly worse. The trade-off in reconstruction performance for the two types of 
characterization data may be explained by the relative complexity of the two latent spaces. The SAXS data 
that we use have limited modes or representations making its latent space simpler or more clustered than 
that of SEM data due to large statistical variance of PMMA domain shapes and positions in SEM images 
belonging to the same morphology. Through similarity matching in pair training of the SAXS data of 
simpler or more clustered latent space with SEM data of sparser latent space, the SAXS latent space 
becomes sparser (leading to worse reconstruction), and the SEM latent space becomes more convergent 
(leading to better reconstruction). 
After the above detailed analysis of selected examples of solo trained VAE and pair trained VAE 
reconstructions for each morphology, in Fig. 5, we show the statistical averages and standard deviations of 
2-point correlation function for all SEM true images and reconstructions in Fig. 5A for solo trained VAE, 
and in Fig. 5B for pair trained VAE. In Fig. 5A, the solo trained VAE’s SEM reconstructions give higher 
2-point correlation function values on average than the true SEM images. In Fig. 5B, the statistical average 
and variance of 2-point correlation function of both pair trained VAE’s SEM reconstructions are a close 
match with that of the true SEM images. We provide lineal path functions calculated for both solo and pair 
trained VAEs’ reconstructions in Fig. S6.  We conclude that pair trained VAE improves SEM 
reconstructions on average for all SEM images as compared to solo trained VAE. 
 
Fig. 5. Statistical average and standard deviation of 2-point correlation functions of PMMA domains of all 
true SEM (training and validation set) and reconstructions. A. From solo trained VAE. B. From pair 
trained VAE. 
 
We also perform the same solo and pair training on the SAXS and SEM paired dataset but with 
different number of training set images also with five different selections of the training set and validation 

set images (determined by a different random seed) at the same training set size to assess the ability to 
generalize and illustrate the data efficiency of our workflow. We use the mean absolute error (MAE) 
between the pixel intensity values of a true SAXS image and of a SAXS reconstruction as the performance 
quantification metric for SAXS reconstruction. We use the MAE between the 𝑆(𝑟) of a true SEM image 
and of a SEM reconstruction as the performance quantification metric for SEM reconstruction. We also use 
ten random cropped instances from each full SEM image as true SEM images per SAXS image to account 
for the higher statistical variance of SEM reconstructions as well as for SEM-SAXS reconstructions. The 
box plots of distributions of all MAEs for SAXS profile reconstructions are shown in Fig. 6A. We observe 
that the median MAE of solo trained SAXS→SAXS reconstruction is much lower than that of the pair 
trained SAXS→SAXS and SEM→SAXS; this is consistent with what we observed qualitatively from Fig. 
3 to Fig. 4 that SAXS reconstruction is the best with solo trained VAE. The median MAE of pair trained 
SEM→SAXS is always a little higher than that of pair trained SAXS→SAXS. We attribute the observed 
difference to the statistical variability of the SEM images reflecting local morphology that may not be the 
mode of morphology that the SAXS captures. We also note that the MAEs of all three reconstructions 
plateau from 48 training set images to 64 training set images implying that we are not improving the 
reconstruction efficacy that much by going with training sets larger than 48.  
The box plots of distributions of all MAEs for SEM image reconstruction are shown in Fig. 6B. 
We observe that the median MAE of pair trained SAXS→SEM reconstruction is always lower than that of 
the other two reconstructions. The performance difference can be explained by our hypothesis that the more 
clustered latent space of the SAXS images help converge the SEM latent space to improve SEM 
reconstruction. The solo and pair trained SEM→SEM reconstructions show comparable MAE for the 
different training set sizes. SEM reconstructions show improvement with more training set images. 

 
Fig. 6. Solo and pair trained VAE performance assessment using mean absolute error as the metric (vary 
the number of training images). A. Mean absolute error between each pairing of true and reconstructed 
SAXS image for all images and multiple VAEs trained with five random seeds, sample size of the boxplot is 
360 for solo trained VAE reconstructed SAXS→SAXS and pair trained VAE reconstructed SAXS→SAXS 
but sample size of the boxplot is 3600 for pair trained VAE reconstructed SEM→SAXS. B. Mean absolute 
error between each pairing of the 2-point correlation functions of PMMA domains of true and reconstructed 
SEM images for all images and multiple VAEs trained with five random seeds (we applied ten random 
crops to each full SEM image during performance assessment), sample sizes of the boxplots are 3600. The 
median values of both plots are presented in Table S2. The notch of the boxplots indicates the 95% 
confidence interval around the median. 
We further probe the capability of PairVAE to generate an ensemble of morphologically similar 
SEM images directly from the latent space through a trained decoder. We note that we have chosen VAE 
instead of another deep learning model architecture called U-Net75 which is the go-to model for biomedical 
image segmentation. U-Net has proven to be good for segmentation, a pixel-wise reconstruction, owing to 
the multiple skip connections established between the encoder and decoder at multiple hierarchical levels. 
And because of the skip connections, the encoder and decoder are trained as a couple in U-Net and cannot 

be decoupled. Being able to separate the trained encoder and decoder in the VAE model enables us to 
conduct pair training and explore not just reconstruction but also image generation ability of the decoder.  
Here, we demonstrate the image generation ability of the decoder. For this we sample latent 
variables from multivariate Gaussian distribution constructed with the values of the SAXS latent variables 
of each morphology example (obtained with pair trained SAXS encoder) shown in Fig. 4A as average and 
variance of the latent variables of the full SAXS dataset as variance. We then use the pair trained SEM 
decoder to generate images from the sampled latent variables; 5 generated examples are shown in Fig. 7A, 
for each morphology. Generated images present degrees of statistical variations of junctions, vacancies, 
and defects of PMMA domains that may occur in experimental BCP assembly. When compared to the 
SAXS→SEM reconstructed images, these generated images (sample size is 100 for each morphology) are 
morphologically similar as verified visually and by the calculated 2-point correlation function shown in Fig. 
7B. By changing the magnitude of the variance of the constructed multivariate Gaussian distribution, we 
observe either better resemblance (smaller variance) Fig. S7 or less resemblance (larger variance) Fig. S8 
to the SAXS→SEM reconstructions. 

 
Fig. 7. Performance assessment of generative ability of pair trained VAE’s SEM decoder. A. SAXS→SEM 
reconstruction and 5 examples of generated SEM images. B. Statistical average and standard deviations 
of 2-point correlation functions of PMMA domains of 100 generated SEM images for each morphology 
example plotted against that of the SAXS→SEM reconstruction. 
CONCLUSION 
In conclusion, we have developed a novel machine learning flow called ‘PairVAE’ that enables cross-
reconstruction capabilities for complementary material structural characterization data. Here we 
demonstrated a proof-of-concept application of PairVAE using complementary characterization data - 2D 
SAXS patterns and SEM images - of ordered block copolymer morphology. By pairing up the latent spaces 

of SAXS and SEM, PairVAE enables cross-reconstruction of SAXS profiles from SEM input or SEM 
images from SAXS input. We were able to generate morphologically similar SEM images from SAXS 
input with close match of the 2-point correlation functions of the PMMA domains to that of the true SEM 
images for all data on average. We provide an explanation for the performance trade-off of pair trained 
VAE seen for SAXS reconstructions (worse than solo trained VAE) and SEM reconstructions (better than 
solo trained VAE). The explanation is that by pairing up SEM latent space (relatively sparse) with SAXS 
latent space (relatively clustered), the SEM latent space becomes more convergent, yielding 
morphologically closer reconstructions than solo training, while SAXS latent space becomes less clustered, 
yielding more unphysical SAXS patterns than solo training. Our PairVAE implementation for SAXS-SEM 
reconstruction specifically incorporated random cropping of SEM images during training as a means of 
data augmentation that help mitigate the small-data handicap. Lastly, we have also shown that generation 
of ensembles of morphologically similar SEM images is possible by sampling latent variables directly; this 
is possible only because we can decouple the trained encoder and decoder which is not possible with more 
commonly used image segmentation models like U-Net75.  
The impact of this PairVAE workflow is in the many potential applications it offers, some of which we 
list below:  
1) Generation of bottleneck characterization data (e.g., laborious sample preparation for microscopy) 
from high throughput data (e.g., scattering profiles collection) that have complementary purposes.  
2) Generation of easier-to-interpret characterization data (e.g., microscopy image) from harder-to-
interpret characterization data (e.g., scattering data) in a data-driven manner without intermediate 
manual interpretation. 
3) Generation of ensembles of structure or morphology data with designed morphological features for 
downstream calculation or simulation of other physical properties such as optical property, 
electrical conductivity property or rheological properties. 
4) Integration with time series data for prediction of time evolution of structure or morphology or 
other characterization data or properties. 
5) (For scattering and microscopy specifically) Direct integration with microscopy and scattering 
experimental setups for real-time high throughput multi-purpose characterization of material 
structure or morphology, or in-situ collection and generation of movies of structural 
characterizations. 
 
 

ASSOCIATED CONTENT 
Supporting information 
Description of the block copolymer SAXS-SEM morphology characterization dataset, image data 
preprocessing procedures, python packages utilized and the usages of each package, the variational 
autoencoder model, the solo training protocol, the pair training protocol, and additional lineal path function 
figures. Supporting information is available from the corresponding author upon request. 
AUTHOR INFORMATION 
Corresponding Author 
Arthi Jayaraman – Department of Chemical and Biomolecular Engineering and Department of 
Materials Science and Engineering, University of Delaware, Newark, Delaware 19716, United States 
Author 
Shizhao Lu - Department of Chemical and Biomolecular, University of Delaware, Newark, 
Delaware, 19716, United States 
Acknowledgements: The authors acknowledge financial support from the U.S. Department of Energy, 
Office of Science Grant Number DE-SC 0023264. The authors thank Gregory Doerk, Kevin Yager, and 
their co-authors for making their block copolymer characterization data openly available. The authors thank 
Gregory S. Doerk, Quentin Michaudel, Ryan C. Hayward, Jonathan A. Malen, Austin M. Evans, Brent S. 
Sumerlin, Pramod Reddy, Vasudevan Venkateshwaran, and Rama K. Vasudevan for their feedback and 
discussion regarding our workflow and results. 
Notes 
The authors declare no competing financial interest. 
 
 
 
 

References 
(1) Agrawal, A.; Choudhary, A. Perspective: Materials informatics and big data: Realization of the “fourth 
paradigm” of science in materials science. Apl Materials 2016, 4 (5), 053208. 
(2) Angermueller, C.; Pärnamaa, T.; Parts, L.; Stegle, O. Deep learning for computational biology. 
Molecular systems biology 2016, 12 (7), 878. 
(3) Sanchez-Lengeling, B.; Aspuru-Guzik, A. Inverse molecular design using machine learning: Generative 
models for matter engineering. Science 2018, 361 (6400), 360-365. 
(4) Butler, K. T.; Davies, D. W.; Cartwright, H.; Isayev, O.; Walsh, A. Machine learning for molecular and 
materials science. Nature 2018, 559 (7715), 547-555. 
(5) Elton, D. C.; Boukouvalas, Z.; Fuge, M. D.; Chung, P. W. Deep learning for molecular design—a review 
of the state of the art. Molecular Systems Design & Engineering 2019, 4 (4), 828-849. 
(6) Kadulkar, S.; Sherman, Z. M.; Ganesan, V.; Truskett, T. M. Machine Learning–Assisted Design of 
Material Properties. Annual Review of Chemical and Biomolecular Engineering 2022, 13, 235-254. 
(7) Ferguson, A. L.; Brown, K. A. Data-driven design and autonomous experimentation in soft and 
biological materials engineering. Annual Review of Chemical and Biomolecular Engineering 2022, 13, 25-
44. 
(8) Choudhary, K.; DeCost, B.; Chen, C.; Jain, A.; Tavazza, F.; Cohn, R.; Park, C. W.; Choudhary, A.; 
Agrawal, A.; Billinge, S. J. Recent advances and applications of deep learning methods in materials 
science. npj Computational Materials 2022, 8 (1), 59. 
(9) Patel, R. A.; Webb, M. A. Data-Driven Design of Polymer-Based Biomaterials: High-throughput 
Simulation, Experimentation, and Machine Learning. ACS Applied Bio Materials 2023. 
(10) Martin, T. B.; Audus, D. J. Emerging Trends in Machine Learning: A Polymer Perspective. ACS 
Polymers Au 2023. 
(11) Le, T.; Epa, V. C.; Burden, F. R.; Winkler, D. A. Quantitative Structure–Property Relationship 
Modeling of Diverse Materials Properties. Chemical Reviews 2012, 112 (5), 2889-2919. DOI: 
10.1021/cr200066h. 
(12) Ma, R.; Liu, Z.; Zhang, Q.; Liu, Z.; Luo, T. Evaluating Polymer Representations via Quantifying 
Structure–Property Relationships. Journal of Chemical Information and Modeling 2019, 59 (7), 3110-
3119. DOI: 10.1021/acs.jcim.9b00358. 
(13) Yuan, S.; Jiao, Z.; Quddus, N.; Kwon, J. S., II; Mashuga, C. V. Developing Quantitative Structure–
Property Relationship Models To Predict the Upper Flammability Limit Using Machine Learning. 
Industrial & Engineering Chemistry Research 2019, 58 (8), 3531-3537. DOI: 10.1021/acs.iecr.8b05938. 
(14) Barnard, A.; Opletal, G. Predicting structure/property relationships in multi-dimensional 
nanoparticle data using t-distributed stochastic neighbour embedding and machine learning. Nanoscale 
2019, 11 (48), 23165-23172. 
(15) Beltran-Villegas, D. J.; Wessels, M. G.; Lee, J. Y.; Song, Y.; Wooley, K. L.; Pochan, D. J.; Jayaraman, A. 
Computational reverse-engineering analysis for scattering experiments on amphiphilic block polymer 
solutions. Journal of the American Chemical Society 2019, 141 (37), 14916-14930. 
(16) Amamoto, Y. Data-driven approaches for structure-property relationships in polymer science for 
prediction and understanding. Polymer Journal 2022, 54 (8), 957-967. DOI: 10.1038/s41428-022-00648-
6. 
(17) Liu, Y.; Kelley, K. P.; Vasudevan, R. K.; Funakubo, H.; Ziatdinov, M. A.; Kalinin, S. V. Experimental 
discovery of structure–property relationships in ferroelectric materials via active learning. Nature 
Machine Intelligence 2022, 4 (4), 341-350. DOI: 10.1038/s42256-022-00460-0. 

(18) Tao, L.; Byrnes, J.; Varshney, V.; Li, Y. Machine learning strategies for the structure-property 
relationship of copolymers. iScience 2022, 25 (7), 104585. DOI: 
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.isci.2022.104585. 
(19) Heil, C. M.; Patil, A.; Dhinojwala, A.; Jayaraman, A. Computational Reverse-Engineering Analysis for 
Scattering Experiments (CREASE) with Machine Learning Enhancement to Determine Structure of 
Nanoparticle Mixtures and Solutions. ACS Central Science 2022, 8 (7), 996-1007. 
(20) Wu, Z.; Jayaraman, A. Machine Learning-Enhanced Computational Reverse-Engineering Analysis for 
Scattering Experiments (CREASE) for Analyzing Fibrillar Structures in Polymer Solutions. Macromolecules 
2022, 55 (24), 11076-11091. DOI: 10.1021/acs.macromol.2c02165. 
(21) Heil, C. M.; Ma, Y.; Bharti, B.; Jayaraman, A. Computational Reverse-Engineering Analysis for 
Scattering Experiments for Form Factor and Structure Factor Determination (“P (q) and S (q) CREASE”). 
JACS Au 2023, 3 (3), 889-904. 
(22) Goodhew, P. J.; Humphreys, J.; Beanland, R. Electron microscopy and analysis; CRC press, 2000. 
(23) Bostanabad, R.; Zhang, Y.; Li, X.; Kearney, T.; Brinson, L. C.; Apley, D. W.; Liu, W. K.; Chen, W. 
Computational microstructure characterization and reconstruction: Review of the state-of-the-art 
techniques. Progress in Materials Science 2018, 95, 1-41. 
(24) Ge, M.; Su, F.; Zhao, Z.; Su, D. Deep learning analysis on microscopic imaging in materials science. 
Materials Today Nano 2020, 11. DOI: 10.1016/j.mtnano.2020.100087. 
(25) Spurgeon, S. R.; Ophus, C.; Jones, L.; Petford-Long, A.; Kalinin, S. V.; Olszta, M. J.; Dunin-Borkowski, 
R. E.; Salmon, N.; Hattar, K.; Yang, W.-C. D. Towards data-driven next-generation transmission electron 
microscopy. Nature materials 2021, 20 (3), 274-279. 
(26) Baskaran, A.; Kautz, E. J.; Chowdhary, A.; Ma, W.; Yener, B.; Lewis, D. J. Adoption of Image-Driven 
Machine Learning for Microstructure Characterization and Materials Design: A Perspective. JOM 2021, 
73 (11), 3639-3657. 
(27) Ede, J. M. Deep learning in electron microscopy. Machine Learning: Science and Technology 2021, 2 
(1), 011004. 
(28) Melanthota, S. K.; Gopal, D.; Chakrabarti, S.; Kashyap, A. A.; Radhakrishnan, R.; Mazumder, N. Deep 
learning-based image processing in optical microscopy. Biophysical Reviews 2022, 1-19. 
(29) Jacobs, R. Deep learning object detection in materials science: Current state and future directions. 
Computational Materials Science 2022, 211, 111527. 
(30) Treder, K. P.; Huang, C.; Kim, J. S.; Kirkland, A. I. Applications of deep learning in electron 
microscopy. Microscopy 2022, 71 (Supplement_1), i100-i115. 
(31) Zhang, L.; Shao, S. Image-based machine learning for materials science. Journal of Applied Physics 
2022, 132 (10), 100701. 
(32) Botifoll, M.; Pinto-Huguet, I.; Arbiol, J. Machine learning in electron microscopy for advanced 
nanocharacterization: current developments, available tools and future outlook. Nanoscale Horizons 
2022, 7 (12), 1427-1477, 10.1039/D2NH00377E. DOI: 10.1039/D2NH00377E. 
(33) Kalinin, S. V.; Ghosh, A.; Vasudevan, R.; Ziatdinov, M. From atomically resolved imaging to 
generative and causal models. Nature Physics 2022, 18 (10), 1152-1160. 
(34) Unruh, D.; Kolluru, V. S. C.; Baskaran, A.; Chen, Y.; Chan, M. K. Theory+ AI/ML for microscopy and 
spectroscopy: Challenges and opportunities. MRS Bulletin 2022, 47 (10), 1024-1035. 
(35) Lyu, Z.; Yao, L.; Chen, W.; Kalutantirige, F. C.; Chen, Q. Electron Microscopy Studies of Soft 
Nanomaterials. Chemical Reviews 2023, 123 (7), 4051-4145. DOI: 10.1021/acs.chemrev.2c00461. 
(36) Shen, D.; Wu, G.; Suk, H.-I. Deep learning in medical image analysis. Annual review of biomedical 
engineering 2017, 19, 221. 
(37) Kermany, D. S.; Goldbaum, M.; Cai, W.; Valentim, C. C.; Liang, H.; Baxter, S. L.; McKeown, A.; Yang, 
G.; Wu, X.; Yan, F. Identifying medical diagnoses and treatable diseases by image-based deep learning. 
Cell 2018, 172 (5), 1122-1131. e1129. 

(38) Lu, S.; Montz, B.; Emrick, T.; Jayaraman, A. Semi-supervised machine learning workflow for analysis 
of nanowire morphologies from transmission electron microscopy images. Digital Discovery 2022, 1 (6), 
816-833. 
(39) Liu, D.; Tan, Y.; Khoram, E.; Yu, Z. Training deep neural networks for the inverse design of 
nanophotonic structures. Acs Photonics 2018, 5 (4), 1365-1369. 
(40) So, S.; Mun, J.; Rho, J. Simultaneous inverse design of materials and structures via deep learning: 
demonstration of dipole resonance engineering using core–shell nanoparticles. ACS applied materials & 
interfaces 2019, 11 (27), 24264-24268. 
(41) Stein, H. S.; Guevarra, D.; Newhouse, P. F.; Soedarmadji, E.; Gregoire, J. M. Machine learning of 
optical properties of materials–predicting spectra from images and images from spectra. Chemical 
science 2019, 10 (1), 47-55. 
(42) Zhou, Q.; Yong, B.; Lv, Q.; Shen, J.; Wang, X. Deep autoencoder for mass spectrometry feature 
learning and cancer detection. IEEE Access 2020, 8, 45156-45166. 
(43) Banko, L.; Maffettone, P. M.; Naujoks, D.; Olds, D.; Ludwig, A. Deep learning for visualization and 
novelty detection in large X-ray diffraction datasets. Npj Computational Materials 2021, 7 (1), 104. 
(44) Grossutti, M.; D’Amico, J.; Quintal, J.; MacFarlane, H.; Quirk, A.; Dutcher, J. R. Deep Learning and 
Infrared Spectroscopy: Representation Learning with a β-Variational Autoencoder. The Journal of 
Physical Chemistry Letters 2022, 13 (25), 5787-5793. 
(45) He, C.; Zhu, S.; Wu, X.; Zhou, J.; Chen, Y.; Qian, X.; Ye, J. Accurate Tumor Subtype Detection with 
Raman Spectroscopy via Variational Autoencoder and Machine Learning. ACS omega 2022, 7 (12), 
10458-10468. 
(46) Yaman, M. Y.; Kalinin, S. V.; Guye, K. N.; Ginger, D. S.; Ziatdinov, M. Learning and Predicting 
Photonic Responses of Plasmonic Nanoparticle Assemblies via Dual Variational Autoencoders. Small n/a 
(n/a), 2205893. DOI: https://doi.org/10.1002/smll.202205893. 
(47) Gómez-Bombarelli, R.; Wei, J. N.; Duvenaud, D.; Hernández-Lobato, J. M.; Sánchez-Lengeling, B.; 
Sheberla, D.; Aguilera-Iparraguirre, J.; Hirzel, T. D.; Adams, R. P.; Aspuru-Guzik, A. Automatic chemical 
design using a data-driven continuous representation of molecules. ACS central science 2018, 4 (2), 268-
276. 
(48) Rajak, P.; Krishnamoorthy, A.; Nakano, A.; Vashishta, P.; Kalia, R. Structural phase transitions in a 
MoWSe 2 monolayer: Molecular dynamics simulations and variational autoencoder analysis. Physical 
Review B 2019, 100 (1), 014108. 
(49) Christofi, E.; Chazirakis, A.; Chrysostomou, C.; Nicolaou, M. A.; Li, W.; Doxastakis, M.; Harmandaris, 
V. A. Deep convolutional neural networks for generating atomistic configurations of multi-component 
macromolecules from coarse-grained models. The Journal of Chemical Physics 2022, 157 (18), 184903. 
(50) Tung, C.-H.; Chang, S.-Y.; Chang, M.-C.; Carrillo, J.-M.; Sumpter, B. G.; Do, C.; Chen, W.-R. Inferring 
colloidal interaction from scattering by machine learning. Carbon Trends 2023, 10, 100252. 
(51) Cang, R.; Li, H.; Yao, H.; Jiao, Y.; Ren, Y. Improving direct physical properties prediction of 
heterogeneous materials from imaging data via convolutional neural network and a morphology-aware 
generative model. Computational Materials Science 2018, 150, 212-221. 
(52) Kim, Y.; Park, H. K.; Jung, J.; Asghari-Rad, P.; Lee, S.; Kim, J. Y.; Jung, H. G.; Kim, H. S. Exploration of 
optimal microstructure and mechanical properties in continuous microstructure space using a 
variational autoencoder. Materials & Design 2021, 202, 109544. 
(53) Yamashita, A.; Nagata, T.; Yagyu, S.; Asahi, T.; Chikyow, T. Direct feature extraction from two-
dimensional X-ray diffraction images of semiconductor thin films for fabrication analysis. Science and 
Technology of Advanced Materials: Methods 2022, 2 (1), 23-37. 
(54) Bridger, A.; David, W. I.; Wood, T. J.; Danaie, M.; Butler, K. T. Versatile domain mapping of scanning 
electron nanobeam diffraction datasets utilising variational autoencoders. npj Computational Materials 
2023, 9 (1), 14. 

(55) Chen, W.; Ferguson, A. L. Molecular enhanced sampling with autoencoders: On‐the‐fly collective 
variable discovery and accelerated free energy landscape exploration. Journal of computational 
chemistry 2018, 39 (25), 2079-2102. 
(56) Chen, W.; Tan, A. R.; Ferguson, A. L. Collective variable discovery and enhanced sampling using 
autoencoders: Innovations in network architecture and error function design. The Journal of chemical 
physics 2018, 149 (7), 072312. 
(57) Yin, J.; Pei, Z.; Gao, M. C. Neural network-based order parameter for phase transitions and its 
applications in high-entropy alloys. Nature Computational Science 2021, 1 (10), 686-693. 
(58) O’Leary, J.; Mao, R.; Pretti, E. J.; Paulson, J. A.; Mittal, J.; Mesbah, A. Deep learning for characterizing 
the self-assembly of three-dimensional colloidal systems. Soft Matter 2021, 17 (4), 989-999. 
(59) Mao, R.; O’Leary, J.; Mesbah, A.; Mittal, J. A Deep Learning Framework Discovers Compositional 
Order and Self-Assembly Pathways in Binary Colloidal Mixtures. JACS Au 2022, 2 (8), 1818-1828. 
(60) Kingma, D. P.; Welling, M. Auto-encoding variational bayes. arXiv preprint arXiv:1312.6114 2013. 
(61) Fasolka, M. J.; Mayes, A. M. Block copolymer thin films: Physics and applications. Annual Review of 
Materials Research 2001, 31 (1), 323-355. 
(62) Bockstaller, M. R.; Mickiewicz, R. A.; Thomas, E. L. Block copolymer nanocomposites: perspectives 
for tailored functional materials. Advanced materials 2005, 17 (11), 1331-1349. 
(63) Orilall, M. C.; Wiesner, U. Block copolymer based composition and morphology control in 
nanostructured hybrid materials for energy conversion and storage: solar cells, batteries, and fuel cells. 
Chemical Society Reviews 2011, 40 (2), 520-535. 
(64) Doerk, G. S.; Yager, K. G. Beyond native block copolymer morphologies. Molecular Systems Design & 
Engineering 2017, 2 (5), 518-538. 
(65) Hajduk, D. A.; Harper, P. E.; Gruner, S. M.; Honeker, C. C.; Kim, G.; Thomas, E. L.; Fetters, L. J. The 
gyroid: a new equilibrium morphology in weakly segregated diblock copolymers. Macromolecules 1994, 
27 (15), 4063-4075. 
(66) Khandpur, A. K.; Foerster, S.; Bates, F. S.; Hamley, I. W.; Ryan, A. J.; Bras, W.; Almdal, K.; Mortensen, 
K. Polyisoprene-polystyrene diblock copolymer phase diagram near the order-disorder transition. 
Macromolecules 1995, 28 (26), 8796-8806. 
(67) Cochran, E. W.; Garcia-Cervera, C. J.; Fredrickson, G. H. Stability of the gyroid phase in diblock 
copolymers at strong segregation. Macromolecules 2006, 39 (7), 2449-2451. 
(68) Pedersen, J. S.; Gerstenberg, M. C. Scattering form factor of block copolymer micelles. 
Macromolecules 1996, 29 (4), 1363-1365. 
(69) Alina, G.; Attala, Z.; Bakker, J.; Bourne, R.; Bouwman, W.; Breßler, I.; Butler, P.; Caddy-Jones, I.; 
Campbell, K.; Cho, J.-H.; et al. SasView - Small Angle Scattering Analysis. www.sasview.org (accessed 
05.23.2023). 
(70) Beltran-Villegas, D.; Heil, C.; Jayaraman, A.; Wessels, G. M.; Wu, Z.; Ye, Z. CREASE Overview — 
crease_ga documentation (crease-ga.readthedocs.io). 2023. https://crease-
ga.readthedocs.io/en/latest/index.html (accessed 05.23.2023). 
(71) Doerk, G. S.; Stein, A.; Bae, S.; Noack, M. M.; Fukuto, M.; Yager, K. G. Autonomous discovery of 
emergent morphologies in directed self-assembly of block copolymer blends. Science Advances 2023, 9 
(2), eadd3687. 
(72) Yager, K. G.; Lai, E.; Black, C. T. Self-assembled phases of block copolymer blend thin films. ACS nano 
2014, 8 (10), 10582-10588. 
(73) Bradley, D.; Roth, G. Adaptive Thresholding using the Integral Image. Journal of Graphics Tools 
2007, 12 (2), 13-21. DOI: 10.1080/2151237X.2007.10129236. 
(74) Gostick, J. T.; Khan, Z. A.; Tranter, T. G.; Kok, M. D.; Agnaou, M.; Sadeghi, M.; Jervis, R. PoreSpy: A 
python toolkit for quantitative analysis of porous media images. Journal of Open Source Software 2019, 
4 (37), 1296. 

(75) Ronneberger, O.; Fischer, P.; Brox, T. U-net: Convolutional networks for biomedical image 
segmentation. In International Conference on Medical image computing and computer-assisted 
intervention, 2015; Springer: pp 234-241. 
 
