1 
 
PANDA: A self-driving lab for studying electrodeposited polymer films 
Harley Quinn,a Gregory A. Robben,a Zhaoyi Zheng,a Alan L. Gardner,b Jörg G. Werner,*abc and 
Keith A. Brown*abd  
aDivision of Materials Science & Engineering, Boston University, Boston, MA, 02215, USA.   
bDepartment of Mechanical Engineering, Boston University, Boston, MA, 02215, USA   
cDepartment of Chemistry, Boston University, Boston, MA, 02215, USA  
dDepartment of Physics, Boston University, Boston, MA, 02215, USA  
*E-mail: brownka@bu.edu, jgwerner@bu.edu  
 

2 
 
Abstract 
We introduce the polymer analysis and discovery array (PANDA), an automated system for high-
throughput electrodeposition and functional characterization of polymer films. The PANDA is a 
custom, modular, and low-cost system based on a CNC gantry that we have modified to include a 
syringe pump, potentiostat, and camera with a telecentric lens. This system can perform fluid 
handling, electrochemistry, and transmission optical measurements on samples in custom 96-well 
plates that feature transparent and conducting bottoms. We begin by validating this platform 
through a series of control fluid handling and electrochemistry experiments to quantify the 
repeatability, lack of cross-contamination, and accuracy of the system. As a proof-of-concept 
experimental campaign to study the functional properties of a model polymer film, we optimize 
the electrochromic switching of electrodeposited poly(3,4-ethylenedioxythiophene):poly(styrene 
sulfonate) (PEDOT:PSS) films. In particular, we explore the monomer concentration, deposition 
time, and deposition voltage using an array of experiments selected by Latin hypercube sampling. 
Subsequently, we run an active learning campaign based upon Bayesian optimization to find the 
processing conditions that lead to the highest electrochromic switching of PEDOT:PSS. This self-
driving lab integrates optical and electrochemical characterization to constitute a novel, automated 
approach for studying functional polymer films. 
 
 
 

3 
 
Introduction 
Self-driving labs (SDL) have emerged as an enabling tool to accelerate research in 
materials science.1,2 These systems leverage robotics to perform high-throughput synthesis and 
characterization while using machine learning to select experiments to accelerate material 
discovery or optimization. In addition to their main advantage, SDLs can offer benefits over 
conventional research in terms of reproducibility, resources used per experiment, and collation of 
metadata. These systems have seen application in fields such as photovoltaics,3 battery research,4 
semiconductor nanoparticles,5 additive manufacturing,6 catalysis,7 and organic lasing materials.8 
As exemplified by the breadth of these applications, SDLs often take the form of bespoke systems 
to perform specific classes of experiments. There has been sustained effort to develop modular 
software tools that can apply to many different SDL formats, such as Coscientist9 or ChemOS,10 
however, the application of SDLs in a given domain still requires innovations in the hardware 
specific to that space. 
One area that has received a particularly large amount of development with regard to SDLs 
is electrochemistry. Early work leveraged the common microtiter plate format to realize systems 
that could measure the electrochemical response of any well by mounting a set of electrodes on a 
moving gantry.11,12 This concept was further developed through the use of a communal working 
electrode and 96 parallel counter electrodes to allow for the whole plate to be characterized 
simultaneously.13 Further modifications to the array format have allowed researchers to include 
the ability to perform photochemistry alongside electrochemistry.14 Custom arrays have also been 
used with sustained electrochemical monitoring to study leeching for copper extraction.15 An 
alternate approach to using arrays of wells is to use a single electrochemical reactor multiple times. 
This approach has been more conducive to realizing closed-loop formulation and testing with 

4 
 
systems being developed to study electrocatalysts,16 electrolytes,17 or the mechanism of 
electrochemical reactions.18  In parallel with these hardware advances, software tools specific to 
electrochemistry have emerged such as Hard Potato,19 a Python library for automating 
electrochemical experiments, and ExpFlow, a graphical user interface for automated 
electrochemical experiments.20  
Despite these innovations, one area of electrochemistry that has been largely unexplored is 
the electrodeposition of polymer films. Electrodeposition is a powerful approach for realizing 
functional ultrathin films,21–23 however, the optimization has not yet taken advantage of the 
acceleration inherent to SDLs. While SDLs have been used to study polymer films prepared 
through other means such as spin coating,24,25 spray-coating,26 drop-casting,27,28 printing,27 and 
spontaneous solution spreading,29 electrodeposition and electrochemical characterization have yet 
to receive substantial attention. Furthermore, many functional properties of electrodeposited films 
require multi-modal characterization, such as optical characterization, that is incompatible with 
previously studied electrochemical SDLs.  
 
Here, we introduce an open-source SDL that electrodeposits and functionally characterizes 
polymer films using a combination of electrochemical and optical techniques (Figure 1). 
Experiments are performed in a novel well plate architecture in which the transparent bottom of 
each well constitutes the working electrode while enabling transmission optical characterization. 
We perform an extensive series of experiments to determine the precision and accuracy of fluid 
handling while ruling out the potential for cross-contamination. In addition, we validate the 
performance and reproducibility of the custom electrochemical cells. Finally, we benchmark the 
functional performance of this SDL by running a fully autonomous campaign to optimize the 
electrochromic performance of electrodeposited poly(3,4-ethylenedioxythiophene) (PEDOT). 

5 
 
Crucially, this system is low cost and open source, meaning that others can adopt or modify it to 
explore myriad properties for electrodeposited polymers. 
 
Fig. 1 (A) A 3D rendering of the polymer analysis and discovery array (PANDA) highlighting the tool end and well plate in a green box. (B) Detailed 3D 
rendering of the tool end , featuring: (i) liquid handling attachment consisting of a custom pipette tip adapter, (ii) an electrochemical attachment 
enclosing a counter electrode and a reference electrode , and (iii) a telecentric lens attached to a camera for optical characterization. (C) Screenshot of 
PANDA interface showing real-time monitoring images (top left), main menu (top right), stock solution levels (bottom left), a captured image of an 
electrodeposited film (bottom center), and deck status (bottom right). (i)  Schematic showing the liquid handling system and calibrated performance. (ii) 
Schematic showing the electrochemical system with example cyclic voltammetry data. (iii) Schematic showing optical characterization system with a 
depiction of how the studied films are perceived in CIE L*a*b* coordinates. 
 
 
 

6 
 
Experimental 
Hardware  
The robotic system was built around a modified CNC router (Figure 1A - Genmitsu, 
PROVerXL 4030). The spindle was removed and replaced with a 3D printed modular tool holder 
that holds adapters for two electrodes of an electrochemical cell (Pt wire to serve as a counter 
electrode wrapped around a glass capillary housing an AgCl-coated Ag wire in a 1 M KCl solution 
capped with a glass frit to serve as a reference electrode), pipette tip adapter attached via a tube to 
a syringe pump, and telecentric lens (#52-271, Edmund optics) with attached c-mount camera 
(Grasshopper 3, FLIR) (Figure 1B). Accessories are attached to the deck of the mill using t-slots 
as mounting points to hold stock solutions, an electrolyte reference solution, waste vials, and a 
custom substrate mount (Figure S1). Mounted around the system are two process-monitoring 
cameras to allow visualization and recording of the key areas in the system including experiment 
progress and liquid handling. (Figure 1C) For liquid handling validation experiments, a piece of 
the deck was removed to allow the use of an analytical balance (Entris II Essential Precision 
Balance, Sartorius) while performing dispensing operations. For control of the fluidics, we 
integrated a syringe pump (Aladin Model A-1000, WPI) and for the electrochemistry a potentiostat 
(Interface 1010E, Gamry). Pictures detailing the system are included in Figure S2. 
Software 
The PANDA is controlled by a custom Python program that users interact with via a text-
based terminal interface. Through this interface individual actions may be taken, such as updating 
the locations or contents of physical objects, generating experiment instruction sets, or initiating 
either a semiautonomous or fully autonomous campaign. 

7 
 
The program is a composition of custom scripts and modules which themselves depend 
upon the Python Standard Library and third-party open-source libraries such as gpytorch for 
machine learning. The overall architecture represents each virtual or physical system component 
in its own module in an effort to realize a modular and easy to maintain codebase. The individual 
modules are then used as configurable building blocks by higher level components responsible for 
orchestrating the mill’s movements; experiment generation, selection, execution, and analysis; 
communication with the research team through Slack; control of Open Broadcaster Software for 
monitoring; and database communication. Further details of the software are included in the SI 
(Figures S3 – S6, Table S1) along with all code used in this work. 
Chemicals and materials 
For experiments to study fluid handling, de-ionized water (18.2 MΩ·cm Milli-Q, 
Millipore) was used. For experiments to study the electrochemical system, the PANDA used 
potassium ferricyanide (5 mM or 10 mM, 99+%, Thermo Scientific) in de-ionized water with 
potassium chloride (0.1 M, 99+%, Thermo Scientific) as the supporting electrolyte. 
For the polymer film electrodeposition experiments, the deposition solution was made by 
dissolving 3,4-ethylenedioxythiophene (EDOT) (99%, Acros Organics) in a 1:1 (v:v) ratio of 
methanol (HPLC, Thermo Scientific) to de-ionized water at concentrations between 0.01 and 0.1 
M and adding poly(styrene sulfonic acid) sodium salt (1 mM, M.W. 70,000 Da, Thermo 
Scientific). Lithium perchlorate (0.1 M, 99%, Sigma-Aldrich) was dissolved as the supporting 
electrolyte in de-ionized water and used for the oxidation and reduction of PEDOT films in the 
electrochromic characterization experiments. 
 

8 
 
Working electrode fabrication and electrochemical measurements 
Glass slides (86 x 126 mm2, polished borofloat glass – S.I. Howard Glass Co., Inc.) were 
cleaned in acetone followed by isopropyl alcohol (IPA) and dried under a nitrogen stream prior to 
use. A conductive layer of indium tin oxide (ITO) was sputtered onto the glass slides using DC 
Magnetron sputtering (Angstrom, EvoVac). The slides were subsequently annealed at 400 °C for 
5 minutes resulting in a sheet resistivity of 410 Ω/sq.  
Polydimethylsiloxane (PDMS) sheets were made by pouring a 10:1 base:crosslinker ratio 
of Sylgard 184 (Electron Microscopy Sciences) into a custom 3D printed polylactic acid (PLA) 
frame mounted on clean glass slides and then allowed to cure at room temperature for 48 hours. 
After removal from the glass substrate, wells were laser-cut (Epilog, Fusion Edge 12) into the 
PDMS sheets using a custom template designed to mimic the geometry of commercially available 
96-well plates. After cutting, the PDMS was thoroughly cleaned with de-ionized water and then 
rinsed with IPA. The PDMS gasket was then mounted onto the ITO-coated glass by applying a 
thin layer of uncured PDMS to the gasket and aligning it onto the ITO-coated glass using an 
alignment tool.   
All electrochemical experiments were conducted using a Gamry Interface 1010E 
potentiostat in a three-electrode configuration. The ITO-coated glass served as the working 
electrode, a platinum wire (diameter 0.25 mm, 99.9% trace metals basis) was used as the counter 
electrode, and an AgCl-coated Ag wire in a 1 M KCl solution separated from the working solution 
by a glass frit was used as the reference electrode (Ag/AgCl Reference Electrode, CH Instruments). 
The second cycle of cyclic voltammetry (CV) was used for all analyses to avoid any transient 
effects.  

9 
 
Results and Discussion 
Validation of Automated Fluid Handling and Electrochemistry 
In order to develop the confidence needed to utilize the PANDA as an SDL and perform 
polymer deposition experiments, it is first necessary to evaluate that each module of the system is 
functioning reliably. Foundational to any experiment is the ability to dispense fluid. As such, we 
began by exploring the accuracy and precision of PANDA-based fluid handling. Initially, we 
sought to compare the performance using each of the two conventional micro pipetting techniques: 
reverse pipetting and forward pipetting (Figure 2A). In reverse pipetting, extra fluid is drawn into 
the pipette with the intended volume specified by the dispensing step. In forward pipetting, the 
intended volume is determined by the amount drawn into the pipette with an additional “blow-out” 
volume of air being used to ensure that all fluid is dispensed. To explore the performance of each 
approach, we performed 600 randomized experiments in which 100 µL was pipetted onto an 
analytical balance by the PANDA (Figure 2B). Interestingly, we observed that forward pipetting 
produced more accurate results with the average dispensed quantity being 94.8 µL vs 70.6 µL for 
reverse pipetting. While inaccuracies may on average be corrected, perhaps more important was 
the difference in precision with forward pipetting producing a more precise standard deviation of 
1.7 µL vs 4.0 µL for reverse pipetting. Based on these results, all subsequent work utilized forward 
pipetting.  

10 
 
 
Fig. 2 (A) Left schematic: Reverse pipetting process illustrated in three steps— (1) withdraw a programmed volume plus an additional 40 µL from the 
stock solution, (2) dispense the programmed volume into a container on an integrated analytical balance, (3) discard the remaining volume in the 
pipette tip. Right schematic: Forward pipetting process detailed in two steps— (1) withdraw a programmed volume from the stock solution, (2) dispense 
the entire solution into a container on an integrated analytical balance. (B) Comparison of volume dispensed 𝑉𝑉𝐷𝐷 when reverse pipetting (teal) and 
forward pipetting (purple) across 600 experiments. Histograms show the frequency of 𝑉𝑉𝐷𝐷 for each method. The 100 µL target volume VT is marked by a 
dashed green line. (C) Left: 𝑉𝑉D vs. VT over volumes ranging from 20 to 140 µL in 10 µL increments, with 8 replicates per volume. Right: Result of a 
second set of experiments after calibrating with a linear shift. 
 
Having selected forward pipetting due to its comparatively high precision, we sought to 
determine a calibration strategy to improve the accuracy of fluid handling. In a calibration 
experiment, we dispensed volumes between 30 and 140 µL in 10 µL increments across eight 
replicates per volume while measuring the dispensed mass using the scale (Figure 2C left). The 
root mean squared error (RMSE) for the parity line (green) was calculated to be 7.8 µL, providing 
a measure of the accuracy without calibration. Fitting the data to a line, we find an RMSE of 2.3 
µL, consistent with the precision reported in the prior study. Based on the linear appearance of the 
data, we hypothesized that applying a linear calibration function to adjust the programmed volume 
𝑉𝑉𝑇𝑇 would remove any systematic inaccuracies. Thus, we repeated the experiments with the newly 

11 
 
calibrated volumes (Figure 2C right). In the calibrated experiments, our accuracy improved to 2.8 
µL, and our precision remained consistent at 2.3 µL, demonstrating a clear improvement in 
accuracy while maintaining precision with the application of a linear calibration function. To 
ensure accuracy throughout experiments we programmed the PANDA to perform 1000 
withdrawals and dispensing actions with three different pipette tips and found minimal tip-to-tip 
variation (Figure S7). This allowed us to replace the pipette tip less frequently, saving time and 
minimizing waste. 
Having calibrated the liquid handling system, we validated the electrochemical system 
next. While the materials that constitute the electrodes are relatively common, the geometry of the 
fluid cell is comparatively novel, meaning that well-to-well variability and repeatability should be 
assessed. Thus, we performed a series of experiments using aqueous K3Fe(CN)6 (FC), a standard 
redox probe,30 in a series of experiments with KCl as the supporting electrolyte. We programmed 
the PANDA to deposit 120 µL of the FC solution into a single well, perform CV (operating voltage 
between -0.2 and 0.6 V vs. Ag/AgCl, scan rate 50 mV s-1), remove the used solution, and then 
replicate this process for a total of ten experiments (Figure 3A). The CV results (Figure 3B) 
showed consistent anodic peak currents 𝑗𝑗𝑝𝑝𝑝𝑝, peak current differences Δ𝑗𝑗𝑝𝑝, and peak separations 
Δ𝐸𝐸𝑝𝑝, indicating that the system is reproducible. This procedure was repeated in two additional 
wells to test well-to-well variability, results of which are shown in Figure 3C. Importantly, the 
mean results for the three wells were within 6 mV and 0.03 mA cm-2 for their Δ𝐸𝐸𝑝𝑝 and Δ𝑗𝑗𝑝𝑝 values, 
respectively. 

12 
 
 
Fig. 3 (A) Schematic of the K3Fe(CN)6 (FC) experiment process: (1) FC solution is added to a well, (2) cyclic voltammetry (CV) is performed, and (3) 
the solution is removed. (B) Ten CVs showing current density 𝑗𝑗 vs. potential 𝐸𝐸 vs. an Ag/Ag+ reference electrode. Key features are highlighted: peak-to-
peak separation Δ𝐸𝐸𝑝𝑝 in a shaded peach region, anodic peak height 𝑗𝑗𝑝𝑝𝑝𝑝 between two dashed purple lines, and distance between peaks Δ𝑗𝑗𝑝𝑝 between two 
dashed blue lines. (C) Plot of 𝑗𝑗𝑝𝑝𝑝𝑝 vs.  Δ𝐸𝐸𝑝𝑝  from B with data from two additional wells with 10 experiments each. Marker color indicates the well used, 
with the X symbols denoting the averages for each well. (D) Schematic of the process used to rinse between experiments in the same well: (1) CV with 
FC, (2) removal of FC solution, (3) addition of electrolyte rinse, and (4) CV in the rinse solution. The result is shown as the bottom panel as Δ𝑗𝑗𝑝𝑝 vs. 
number of rinses with points colored by the residual FC concentration. (E) Schematics of the mixing strategies used in experiments: Top—5 mM FC 
dispensed directly; Middle—10 mM FC added and then diluted to 5 mM with electrolyte; Bottom—Electrolyte added first and then concentrated to 5 
mM FC by adding 10 mM FC. In all experiments, a CV was performed after fluid handling. (F) Plot of 𝑗𝑗𝑝𝑝𝑝𝑝 vs.  Δ𝐸𝐸𝑝𝑝 resulting from the mixing strategies in 
E. Marker color indicates the mixing sequence as shown in E. The X symbols show the averages found for each method. 
 
As many workflows of polymer analysis will involve multiple fluid handling steps, it is 
necessary to evaluate the degree to which both the pipette tip and wells can be rinsed without 
residual solution remaining. The capability of performing sequential steps in a well is particularly 
important for in-loop film characterization without human intervention. Thus, we programmed the 
PANDA to withdraw FC solution, dispense it directly into waste, and then perform a rinsing action 
(withdrawing and dispensing) three times before withdrawing electrolyte solution from a different 
stock vial, dispensing it into a new well, and performing CV to determine the presence of any 

13 
 
residual redox-active species (Figure S8). After three rinses, residual redox-active species were 
undetectable, establishing the pipette rinse protocol for subsequent experiments. For the evaluation 
of our well rinsing procedure, the PANDA was programmed to dispense FC solution into a well, 
execute a CV, remove the solution from the well, fill the well with 120 µL of electrolyte solution, 
and then perform CV again to determine the presence of any residual redox-active species over 
multiple repetitions (Figure 3D top). Importantly, redox-active species were undetectable after 
four rinses, establishing the rinse protocol for subsequent experiments (Figure 3D bottom). Based 
on the fitting of the linear portion of this curve, approximately 75% of the redox-active species is 
removed from the well with each rinsing cycle. 
As a final set of experiments to validate the performance of the PANDA, we sought to 
evaluate its ability to mix solutions in the wells. This capability is critical for studying series of 
reagent concentrations using a combination of finite stock solutions. To explore this, we compared 
the CVs that resulted from three different processes that should have resulted in the same final 
concentration: (1) a premixed control that was 5 mM FC, (2) wells prepared by first depositing 
10 mM FC and then an equal volume of electrolyte, and (3) wells prepared by first depositing an 
electrolyte solution and then 10 mM FC (Figure 3E). A total of 18 CVs were performed in two 
separate wells with each well being rinsed after each experiment. Aside from the natural agitation 
arising from deposition, no further mixing was performed. The outcomes, depicted as 𝑗𝑗𝑝𝑝𝑝𝑝 versus 
Δ𝐸𝐸𝑝𝑝, indicated that all preparation methods produced outcomes that were not statistically 
distinguishable (single factor ANOVA, α=0.05, p-value = 0.45 for Δ𝐸𝐸𝑝𝑝 and 0.14 for 𝑗𝑗𝑝𝑝𝑝𝑝), 
confirming that the solutions were adequately mixed (Figure 3F).   
 

14 
 
Building PEDOT training data set 
Following the successful validation of our liquid handling and electrochemical systems, 
we programmed the PANDA to electrodeposit PEDOT:PSS films as a proof of concept. Each 
experiment was a nine-step process (Figure 4A) in which the PANDA, (1) selected a previously 
unused well, (2) dispensed an EDOT solution into that well, (3) conducted electrodeposition using 
potentiostatic chronoamperometry, (4) rinsed the well with electrolyte solution, (5) imaged the 
deposited film, (6) dispensed the inert supporting electrolyte solution for switching the 
electrochromic state, (7) reduced the film by applying a negative potential, (8) rinsed the well with 
electrolyte solution, and then (9) imaged the film in its bleached state (Figure 4A). A Flowchart 
detailing the software steps used by the PANDA are shown in Figure S9. 
 
Fig. 4 (A) Schematic showing the experimental sequence for depositing and characterizing of a poly(3,4-ethylenedioxythiophene) (PEDOT) film. Dark 
blue arrows indicate the workflow. Scale bars are 2 mm. (B) Plots comparing deposition parameters (potential 𝐸𝐸𝑑𝑑𝑑𝑑𝑑𝑑vs. Ag/Ag+ and deposition time 𝑡𝑡𝑑𝑑𝑑𝑑𝑑𝑑) 
for 3,4-ethylenedioxythiophene (EDOT) solutions with concentrations of 0.01, 0.03, and 0.1 M. Marker color represents the colored/bleached contrast 
Δ𝐸𝐸00 and total charge passed 𝑄𝑄 during reduction. (C) Plot of Δ𝐸𝐸00 vs. 𝑄𝑄 for all data shown in B. Images at each point show optical images of the colored 
films. The points denoted by stars in B and C are the best-performing experiment and this data is also shown in A. 
 

15 
 
In considering how to explore the processing space associated with PEDOT:PSS, we 
identified three variables that would be pertinent to the final structure. Initially, we hypothesized 
that electrodeposition time, electrodeposition voltage, and EDOT concentration would be the most 
impactful three variables. Thus, to establish a training dataset in this three-dimensional space, we 
employed Latin hypercube sampling (LHS) to select 16 distinct experiments at each of three 
EDOT concentrations (0.01, 0.03, and 0.1 M), totaling 48 experiments. The parameters ranged 
from 0.8 to 1.6 V for the deposition potential and from 1 to 100 seconds for the deposition time, 
with the latter being selected in log space. We evaluated the outcomes by measuring the Δ𝐸𝐸00, a 
color difference metric by CIE, reflecting the human-perceived color change (Figure 4B top), and 
by quantifying the total charge passed during film reduction with a LiClO4 solution at -0.6 V for 
60 s (Figure 4B bottom). We observed a trend where darker (thicker) films passed more charge 
during reduction, although films with moderate coloration exhibited the most significant color 
change between their colored and bleached states (Figure 4C).  
Autonomous experimentation with machine learning model 
While the prior experimental campaign showed that the PANDA was capable of 
autonomously depositing and functionally characterizing polymer films, these experiments were 
selected before starting the campaign, meaning that the experimental loop was open. Instead, the 
true value of SDLs is realized when each new experiment is selected based on the outcome of all 
prior experiments. Thus, we sought to show that the PANDA could be transformed into a true SDL 
by using machine learning to select each additional experiment. To test this concept, we 
implemented Bayesian optimization (BO) in which the data is modeled using a Gaussian process 
regression (GPR).  

16 
 
Leveraging the data from our prior campaign, we used the 48 LHS-selected data points as 
a training set to initially train the hyperparameters of the GPR using leave-one-out cross-
validation. Noting that the optimal voltage was near the boundary, before proceeding to these BO-
selected experiments, we expanded the range for our deposition parameters to 0.6 – 1.8 V for 
potential and included the 18 discrete EDOT concentrations (between 0.01 – 0.1 M) that could be 
obtained by mixing three stock solutions (0.01, 0.03, and 0.1 M) in 20 µL increments. The 
deposition time bounds remained the same (1 – 100 s). For each concentration, our ML model used 
LHS to generate 50,000 possible experiments, selecting parameters using maximum likelihood 
probability and expected improvement to optimize for Δ𝐸𝐸00. These chosen parameters were then 
used by the robotic system to deposit and characterize a PEDOT film.  
The PANDA active learning campaign proceeded by iteratively selecting an experiment 
using the GPR, performing the selected experiment, and then integrating the new results into the 
model in real time (Figure 5A). Due to our use of BO, the system naturally balanced exploring 
uncertain regions in parameter space and exploiting known high-performance areas. After 20 
rounds of experimentation, the updated model predictions indicated a refined understanding of the 
parameter space, showing a realistic predicted measurement uncertainty (noise hyperparameter = 
3.8) and identifying a reasonably smooth high-performing region which we assume to be the global 
maximum (Figure 5B).  
 

17 
 
 
Fig. 5 (A) Plot illustrating Δ𝐸𝐸00 for initial LHS training data (left), autonomous learning (AL) data in purple (center), and validation points (right) shown in 
the order the experiments were performed. Model predictions and uncertainties are shown as green triangles with error bars and the dashed gold line 
indicates the model’s predicted optimum after all experiments. Examples of champion films are shown in their colored and bleached states (right). (B) 
Surface plots of 𝑡𝑡𝑑𝑑𝑑𝑑𝑑𝑑 vs. 𝐸𝐸𝑑𝑑𝑑𝑑𝑑𝑑  showing (top) Δ𝐸𝐸00 predicted by the GPR model, (middle) uncertainty 𝜎𝜎 in the GPR model, and (bottom) computed 
expected improvement (𝐸𝐸𝐸𝐸). Data is shown after initial training data (left), after one AL experiment (middle), and after 20 AL experiments (right). (C) 
Magnified view of GPR-predicted Δ𝐸𝐸00 after 20 experiments showing the AL data points. The bottom shows a magnified view of the maximum region 
with experiment order indicated by marker color. Stars indicate the parameters used for the validation experiments with the light purple showing the 
observed maximum and dark purple showing the predicted optimum. 
 
In order to evaluate the effectiveness of the campaign, we performed a series of validation 
experiments. First, we queried the model to predict the parameter values expected to result in the 
highest Δ𝐸𝐸00. These conditions were replicated in seven validation experiments shown in dark 
purple (Figure 5A predicted optimum), with the films being visually documented. Next, we 
retested the parameters from our observed maximum experiment during the active learning 
campaign by performing three additional replicates shown in light purple (Figure 5A observed 

18 
 
maximum). While the validation experiments were performed outside the autonomous loop, the 
same evaluation code was used to determine their respective Δ𝐸𝐸00  values. When running an active 
learning campaign, it is prudent to explore both the predicted and observed maximum as both can 
be suboptimal for different reasons. The predicted optimum can be incorrect if the model is not 
accurate in this region. The observed maximum can be suboptimal if the champion observed during 
the campaign happened to experience a large fluctuation. Here, the means of both overlapped with 
the predicted optimum showing  Δ𝐸𝐸00 = 21.7 ± 0.7 while the observed maximum resulted in 
Δ𝐸𝐸00 = 22.2 ± 1.2. The agreement between these values is likely a representation of both the 
smoothness of this space together with the high quality of the model.  
The experiments chosen by the model, overlayed on the model’s refined parameter space, 
highlighted exploratory areas (higher voltages) and exploitative zones (around 1.2 – 1.3 V). A 
zoomed-in view of the area sampled the most by the model, between 5 s < 𝑡𝑡𝑑𝑑𝑑𝑑𝑑𝑑 < 7 s, 
1.15 V < 𝐸𝐸𝑑𝑑𝑑𝑑𝑑𝑑 < 1.4 V, and 0.1 M EDOT concentration, shows the order experiments were 
performed in going from light (experiments performed first) to dark purple (experiments 
performed last) (Figure 5C). This illustrates the model testing the bounds of this smaller space 
before settling on a region that balanced both parameters. 
 
 

19 
 
Conclusions 
Taken together, we have demonstrated the use of a novel SDL for the synthesis and 
functional characterization of electrodeposited polymer films. Crucially, as this system was based 
on a new architecture, we performed extensive validation and calibration of the fluid handling and 
electrochemical subsystems. Finally, the autonomous optimization of PEDOT:PSS deposition 
conditions illustrates how this system can dynamically refine electrodeposition parameters. Given 
the modular and low-cost nature of this system, it has potentially broad applicability. Looking 
ahead, the full potential for SDLs in materials science is vast. As these systems become more 
accessible, bespoke SDL construction in a broader range of labs, including those with more 
restricted resources, can provide ultimately low-cost and efficient means of studying new materials 
systems. Ultimately, our findings support the continued development and investment in 
autonomous research platforms. As these systems evolve to become more sophisticated and user-
friendly, they show promise of opening up new avenues in materials science and engineering, 
potentially altering how we approach and address some of the most pressing technological 
challenges. 
 
 

20 
 
Author Contributions 
Harley Quinn: data curation, formal analysis, investigation, methodology, resources, software, 
writing – original draft, validation, and visualization.  
Gregory A. Robben: data curation, investigation, methodology, software, and writing – review and 
editing.  
Zhaoyi Zhang: investigation, resources, writing – review and editing, and validation. 
Alan L. Gardner: conceptualization, software, writing – review and editing. 
Jörg G. Werner: conceptualization, funding acquisition, supervision, and writing – review and 
editing.  
Keith A. Brown: conceptualization, funding acquisition, project administration, supervision, and 
writing – original draft. 
 
Conflicts of interest 
There are no conflicts to declare. 
 
Acknowledgements 
This work was supported by the National Science Foundation (CBET-2146597), the Toyota 
Research Institute, and the Boston University College of Engineering for support through the 
Dean’s Catalyst Award. The authors are grateful to the Boston University Photonics Center and 
Engineering Product Innovation Center for providing access to instrumentation and resources 
critical to this work. 
 
 
 

21 
 
References 
(1) 
Abolhasani, M.; Kumacheva, E. The Rise of Self-Driving Labs in Chemical and Materials 
Sciences. Nat. Synth. 2023, 2 (6), 483–492. https://doi.org/10.1038/s44160-022-00231-0. 
(2) 
Stach, E.; DeCost, B.; Kusne, A. G.; Hattrick-Simpers, J.; Brown, K. A.; Reyes, K. G.; 
Schrier, J.; Billinge, S.; Buonassisi, T.; Foster, I.; Gomes, C. P.; Gregoire, J. M.; Mehta, A.; 
Montoya, J.; Olivetti, E.; Park, C.; Rotenberg, E.; Saikin, S. K.; Smullin, S.; Stanev, V.; 
Maruyama, B. Autonomous Experimentation Systems for Materials Development: A Community 
Perspective. Matter 2021, 4 (9), 2702–2726. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.matt.2021.06.036. 
(3) 
Du, X.; Lüer, L.; Heumueller, T.; Wagner, J.; Berger, C.; Osterrieder, T.; Wortmann, J.; 
Langner, S.; Vongsaysy, U.; Bertrand, M.; Li, N.; Stubhan, T.; Hauch, J.; Brabec, C. J. Elucidating 
the Full Potential of OPV Materials Utilizing a High-Throughput Robot-Based Platform and 
Machine Learning. Joule 2021, 5 (2), 495–506. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.joule.2020.12.013. 
(4) 
Dave, A. Autonomous Optimization of Non-Aqueous Li-Ion Battery Electrolytes via 
Robotic Experimentation and Machine Learning Coupling. Nat. Commun. 13. 
(5) 
Volk, A. A.; Epps, R. W.; Yonemoto, D. T.; Masters, B. S.; Castellano, F. N.; Reyes, K. 
G.; Abolhasani, M. AlphaFlow: Autonomous Discovery and Optimization of Multi-Step 
Chemistry Using a Self-Driven Fluidic Lab Guided by Reinforcement Learning. Nat. Commun. 
2023, 14 (1), 1403. https://doi.org/10.1038/s41467-023-37139-y. 
(6) 
Snapp, K. L.; Gongora, A. E.; Brown, K. A. Increasing Throughput in Fused Deposition 
Modeling by Modulating Bed Temperature. J. Manuf. Sci. Eng. 2021, 143 (9), 094502. 
https://doi.org/10.1115/1.4050177. 
(7) 
Burger, B.; Maffettone, P. M.; Gusev, V. V.; Aitchison, C. M.; Bai, Y.; Wang, X.; Li, X.; 
Alston, B. M.; Li, B.; Clowes, R.; Rankin, N.; Harris, B.; Sprick, R. S.; Cooper, A. I. A Mobile 
Robotic Chemist. Nature 2020, 583 (7815), 237–241. https://doi.org/10.1038/s41586-020-2442-2. 
(8) 
Strieth-Kalthoff, F.; Hao, H.; Rathore, V.; Derasp, J.; Gaudin, T.; Angello, N. H.; Seifrid, 
M.; Trushina, E.; Guy, M.; Liu, J.; Tang, X.; Mamada, M.; Wang, W.; Tsagaantsooj, T.; Lavigne, 
C.; Pollice, R.; Wu, T. C.; Hotta, K.; Bodo, L.; Li, S.; Haddadnia, M.; Wołos, A.; Roszak, R.; Ser, 
C. T.; Bozal-Ginesta, C.; Hickman, R. J.; Vestfrid, J.; Aguilar-Granda, A.; Klimareva, E. L.; 
Sigerson, R. C.; Hou, W.; Gahler, D.; Lach, S.; Warzybok, A.; Borodin, O.; Rohrbach, S.; Sanchez-
Lengeling, B.; Adachi, C.; Grzybowski, B. A.; Cronin, L.; Hein, J. E.; Burke, M. D.; Aspuru-
Guzik, A. Delocalized, Asynchronous, Closed-Loop Discovery of Organic Laser Emitters. Science 
2024, 384 (6697), eadk9227. https://doi.org/10.1126/science.adk9227. 
(9) 
Boiko, D. A.; MacKnight, R.; Kline, B.; Gomes, G. Autonomous Chemical Research with 
Large Language Models. Nature 2023, 624 (7992), 570–578. https://doi.org/10.1038/s41586-023-
06792-0. 
(10) 
Sim, M.; Vakili, M. G.; Strieth-Kalthoff, F.; Hao, H.; Hickman, R. J.; Miret, S.; Pablo-
García, S.; Aspuru-Guzik, A. ChemOS 2.0: An Orchestration Architecture for Chemical Self-

22 
 
Driving 
Laboratories. 
Matter 
2024, 
S2590238524001954. 
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.matt.2024.04.022. 
(11) 
Erichsen, T.; Reiter, S.; Ryabova, V.; Bonsen, E. M.; Schuhmann, W.; Märkle, W.; Tittel, 
C.; Jung, G.; Speiser, B. Combinatorial Microelectrochemistry: Development and Evaluation of 
an 
Electrochemical 
Robotic 
System. 
Rev. 
Sci. 
Instrum. 
2005, 
76 
(6), 
062204. 
https://doi.org/10.1063/1.1906106. 
(12) 
Zitka, J.; Sileny, J.; Kudr, J.; Koudelkova, Z.; Ilieva, L.; Richtera, L.; Syrovy, T.; Adam, 
V.; Zitka, O. Fully Automated Station for Testing, Characterizing and Modifying Screen-Printed 
Electrodes. Anal. Methods 2022, 14 (39), 3824–3830. https://doi.org/10.1039/D2AY01123A. 
(13) 
Gerroll, B. H. R.; Kulesa, K. M.; Ault, C. A.; Baker, L. A. Legion: An Instrument for High-
Throughput 
Electrochemistry. 
ACS 
Meas. 
Sci. 
Au 
2023, 
3 
(5), 
371–379. 
https://doi.org/10.1021/acsmeasuresciau.3c00022. 
(14) 
Rein, J.; Annand, J. R.; Wismer, M. K.; Fu, J.; Siu, J. C.; Klapars, A.; Strotman, N. A.; 
Kalyani, D.; Lehnherr, D.; Lin, S. Unlocking the Potential of High-Throughput Experimentation 
for Electrochemistry with a Standardized Microscale Reactor. ACS Cent. Sci. 2021, 7 (8), 1347–
1355. https://doi.org/10.1021/acscentsci.1c00328. 
(15) 
Godfrey, D.; Bannock, J. H.; Kuzmina, O.; Welton, T.; Albrecht, T. A Robotic Platform 
for High-Throughput Electrochemical Analysis of Chalcopyrite Leaching. Green Chem. 2016, 18 
(7), 1930–1937. https://doi.org/10.1039/C5GC02306H. 
(16) 
Kodera, M.; Sayama, K. An Automatic Robot System for Machine Learning–Assisted 
High-Throughput Screening of Composite Electrocatalysts. Digit. Discov. 2023, 2 (6), 1683–1687. 
https://doi.org/10.1039/D3DD00116D. 
(17) 
Oh, I.; Pence, M. A.; Lukhanin, N. G.; Rodríguez, O.; Schroeder, C. M.; Rodríguez-López, 
J. The Electrolab: An Open-Source, Modular Platform for Automated Characterization of Redox-
Active Electrolytes. Device 2023, 1 (5), 100103. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.device.2023.100103. 
(18) 
Sheng, H.; Sun, J.; Rodríguez, O.; Hoar, B. B.; Zhang, W.; Xiang, D.; Tang, T.; Hazra, A.; 
Min, D. S.; Doyle, A. G.; Sigman, M. S.; Costentin, C.; Gu, Q.; Rodríguez-López, J.; Liu, C. 
Autonomous Closed-Loop Mechanistic Investigation of Molecular Electrochemistry via 
Automation. Nat. Commun. 2024, 15 (1), 2781. https://doi.org/10.1038/s41467-024-47210-x. 
(19) 
Rodriguez, O.; Pence, M. A.; Rodriguez-Lopez, J. Hard Potato: A Python Library to 
Control Commercial Potentiostats and to Automate Electrochemical Experiments. Anal. Chem. 
2023. https://doi.org/10.1021/acs.analchem.2c04862. 
(20) 
Duke, R.; Mahmoudi, S.; Kaur, A. P.; Bhat, V.; Dingle, I. C.; Stumme, N. C.; Shaw, S. K.; 
Eaton, D.; Vego, A.; Risko, C. ExpFlow: A Graphical User Interface for Automated Reproducible 
Electrochemistry. Digit. Discov. 2024, 3 (1), 163–172. https://doi.org/10.1039/D3DD00156C. 

23 
 
(21) 
Xia, C.; Fan, X.; Park, M.; Advincula, R. C. Ultrathin Film Electrodeposition of 
Polythiophene Conjugated Networks through a Polymer Precursor Route. Langmuir 2001, 17 (25), 
7893–7898. https://doi.org/10.1021/la011259d. 
(22) 
Palma-Cando, A.; Rendón-Enríquez, I.; Tausch, M.; Scherf, U. Thin Functional Polymer 
Films 
by 
Electropolymerization. 
Nanomaterials 
2019, 
9 
(8), 
1125. 
https://doi.org/10.3390/nano9081125. 
(23) 
Wang, W.; Zheng, Z.; Resing, A. B.; Brown, K. A.; Werner, J. G. Conformal 
Electrodeposition of Ultrathin Polymeric Films with Tunable Properties from Dual-Functional 
Monomers. Mol. Syst. Des. Eng. 2023, No. Cvd. https://doi.org/10.1039/d2me00246a. 
(24) 
Sun, S.; Tiihonen, A.; Oviedo, F.; Liu, Z.; Thapa, J.; Zhao, Y.; Hartono, N. T. P.; Goyal, 
A.; Heumueller, T.; Batali, C.; Encinas, A.; Yoo, J. J.; Li, R.; Ren, Z.; Peters, I. M.; Brabec, C. J.; 
Bawendi, M. G.; Stevanovic, V.; Fisher, J.; Buonassisi, T. A Data Fusion Approach to Optimize 
Compositional 
Stability 
of 
Halide 
Perovskites. 
Matter 
2021, 
4 
(4), 
1305–1322. 
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.matt.2021.01.008. 
(25) 
MacLeod, B. P.; Parlane, F. G. L.; Morrissey, T. D.; Häse, F.; Roch, L. M.; Dettelbach, K. 
E.; Moreira, R.; Yunker, L. P. E.; Rooney, M. B.; Deeth, J. R.; Lai, V.; Ng, G. J.; Situ, H.; Zhang, 
R. H.; Elliott, M. S.; Haley, T. H.; Dvorak, D. J.; Aspuru-Guzik, A.; Hein, J. E.; Berlinguette, C. 
P. Self-Driving Laboratory for Accelerated Discovery of Thin-Film Materials. Sci. Adv. 2020, 6 
(20). https://doi.org/10.1126/sciadv.aaz8867. 
(26) 
Rupnow, C. C.; MacLeod, B. P.; Mokhtari, M.; Ocean, K.; Dettelbach, K. E.; Lin, D.; 
Parlane, F. G. L.; Chiu, H. N.; Rooney, M. B.; Waizenegger, C. E. B.; De Hoog, E. I.; Soni, A.; 
Berlinguette, C. P. A Self-Driving Laboratory Optimizes a Scalable Process for Making Functional 
Coatings. Cell Rep. Phys. Sci. 2023, 4 (5), 101411. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.xcrp.2023.101411. 
(27) 
Vriza, A.; Chan, H.; Xu, J. Self-Driving Laboratory for Polymer Electronics. Chem. Mater. 
2023, 35 (8), 3046–3056. https://doi.org/10.1021/acs.chemmater.2c03593. 
(28) 
Bash, D.; Chenardy, F. H.; Ren, Z.; Cheng, J. J.; Buonassisi, T.; Oliveira, R.; Kumar, J. N.; 
Hippalgaonkar, K. Accelerated Automated Screening of Viscous Graphene Suspensions with 
Various Surfactants for Optimal Electrical Conductivity. Digit. Discov. 2022, 1 (2), 139–146. 
https://doi.org/10.1039/D1DD00008J. 
(29) 
Wang, R.; Lüer, L.; Langner, S.; Heumueller, T.; Forberich, K.; Zhang, H.; Hauch, J.; Li, 
N.; Brabec, C. J. Understanding the Microstructure Formation of Polymer Films by Spontaneous 
Solution Spreading Coating with a High‐Throughput Engineering Platform. ChemSusChem 2021, 
14 (17), 3590–3598. https://doi.org/10.1002/cssc.202100927. 
(30) 
Rock, P. A. The Standard Oxidation Potential of the Ferrocyanide-Ferricyanide Electrode 
at 25° and the Entropy of Ferrocyanide Ion. J. Phys. Chem. 1966, 70 (2), 576–580. 
https://doi.org/10.1021/j100874a042. 
 
 

24 
 
Supporting Information  
for  
PANDA: A self-driving lab for studying electrodeposited polymer films 
Harley Quinn,a Gregory A. Robben,a Zhaoyi Zheng,a Alan L. Gardner,b Jörg G. Werner,*abc and 
Keith A. Brown*abd  
aDivision of Materials Science & Engineering, Boston University, Boston, MA, 02215, USA.   
bDepartment of Mechanical Engineering, Boston University, Boston, MA, 02215, USA   
cDepartment of Chemistry, Boston University, Boston, MA, 02215, USA  
dDepartment of Physics, Boston University, Boston, MA, 02215, USA  
*E-mail: brownka@bu.edu, jgwerner@bu.edu  
 
 
 

25 
 
 
Fig. S1 (A) Exploded view of substrate holder including the electroluminescent panel (27260-P, 
TechnoLight) used for optical transmission measurements. (B) Top view of holder with 
polydimethylsiloxane (PDMS) wells on substrate illustrating screw holes where it attaches to the 
deck. (C) Front view of substrate with PDMS wells showing the spacer and how gold-coated 
pogo (spring-loaded) pins contact the conductive surface of the transparent substrate. (D) Front 
view of fully assembled substrate holder with clip holding pieces together. 
 
 

26 
 
 
Fig. S2 (A) Picture of the PANDA instrument deck with the reference electrode in electrolyte 
solution. (B) View of the PANDA deck with a panel removed for the scale, used in the liquid 
handling validation experiments. (C) PANDA enclosure with light blocking curtain installed for 
electrochromic experiments. (D) Close up view of counter and reference electrode in one of the 
PDMS wells. (E) Top view of the PDMS well plate over the electroluminescent panel with 
PEDOT:PSS films electrodeposited in some of the wells. (F) Close up view of the liquid 
handling system’s pipette tip, removing solution from one of the wells after an experiment. 

27 
 
 
Fig. S3 Flowchart of PANDA software main menu. 
 

28 
 
 
Fig. S4 Flow chart showing initialization of PANDA prior to running the experiment loop. 
 
 

29 
 
 
Fig. S5 Flowchart of PANDA software showing experiment loop. 
 
 

30 
 
 
Fig. S6 Flowchart of PANDA software demonstrating the end of the experiment loop, with error 
handling and shutting down the PANDA. 
 
Table S1 Open-source Python (version 3.11.9) packages used by the PANDA 
Purpose 
Package Name 
Version 
Source 
Cameras 
obsws-python 
1.7.0 
https://pypi.org/project/obsws-python/ 
Machine Learning 
gpytorch 
1.11 
https://pypi.org/project/gpytorch/ 
Data visualization 
matplotlib 
3.8.4 
https://pypi.org/project/matplotlib/ 
Data handling 
pandas 
2.2.2 
conda-defaults 
Liquid handling 
calculations 
pulp 
2.8.0 
conda-forge 
Data validation 
pydantic 
2.5.3 
conda-defaults 
Instrument 
communication 
pyserial 
3.5 
conda-defaults 
Slack communications 
regex 
2023.10.3 
conda-defaults 
Image processing 
scikit-image 
0.23.2 
conda-defaults 
Machine learning 
scikit-learn 
1.4.2 
conda-defaults 
Slack communications 
slack-sdk 
3.19.5 
conda-defaults 

31 
 
 
Fig. S7 Plot showing three different pipette tips each performing 1000 fluid deposition 
experiments using forward pipetting, plotting experiment volume dispensed 𝑉𝑉𝐷𝐷 vs. experiment 
number. Histograms show the frequency of dispensed volumes. The target volume 𝑉𝑉𝑇𝑇 of 100 µL 
is marked by a dashed green line. RMSE for each pipette tip from top to bottom, 2.8 µL, 1.8 µL, 
and 2.2 µL. 
 
 
 
 
Fig. S8 (A) Cyclic voltammograms (CVs) of an electrolyte solution (light teal), ferricyanide 
solution (FC), and electrolyte solution dispensed with a rinsed pipette (dark teal) performed with 
operating voltage between -0.2 and 0.5 V, scan rate 50 mV s-1. (B) Plot showing the peak-to-peak 
current density Δ𝑗𝑗𝑝𝑝 values obtained for each CV from A. 
 
 

32 
 
 
Fig. S9 Flowchart illustrating the protocol for PEDOT:PSS experiments. 
