Search Strategies for Self-driving Laboratories with
Pending Experiments
Hao Wen
University of Surrey, UK
Matterhorn Studio
hao@matterhorn.studio
Jakob Zeitler
Matterhorn Studio
Oxford, United Kingdom
jakob@matterhorn.studio
Connor Rupnow
connor@rupnow.com
Abstract
Self-driving laboratories (SDLs) consist of multiple stations that perform material
synthesis and characterisation tasks. To minimize station downtime and maximize
experimental throughput, it is practical to run experiments in asynchronous parallel,
in which multiple experiments are being performed at once in different stages.
Asynchronous parallelization of experiments, however, introduces delayed feed-
back (i.e. “pending experiments”), which is known to reduce Bayesian optimiser
performance. Here, we build a simulator for a multi-stage SDL and compare
optimisation strategies for dealing with delayed feedback and asynchronous paral-
lelized operation. Using data from a real SDL, we build a ground truth Bayesian
optimisation simulator from 177 previously run experiments for maximizing the
conductivity of functional coatings. We then compare search strategies such as
expected improvement, noisy expected improvement, 4-mode exploration and
random sampling. We evaluate their performance in terms of amount of delay and
problem dimensionality. Our simulation results showcase the trade-off between the
asynchronous parallel operation and delayed feedback.
1
Introduction
Self-driving laboratories (SDLs) utilize automation and artificial intelligence (AI) to accelerate the
discovery of new mission critical materials such as perovskites [12], catalysts [5], nanoparticles [8],
and more [10] [6] [13] [17]. SDLs consist of multiple stages that, step by step, perform different
material synthesis and characterisation tasks (Figure 1A)[15].
As the SDL performs an experiment, the material moves between task stations much like a conveyor
belt in a production line. The simplest way to make materials would be to run experiments one at
a time in serial operation (Figure 1B). To minimize station downtime and maximize experimental
throughput, it is practical to have all stations running continuously. This approach is known as
asynchronous parallel, in which multiple experiments are being performed at once in different
stages (Figure 1C). This increases experimental throughput by allowing the SDL to perform multiple
experiments at once, rather than one at a time.
Asynchronous parallelization of experiments, however, introduces delayed feedback in which new
experiments must be chosen while previous experiments are running. The optimisation algorithm
must use incomplete information to choose new experimental conditions. Delayed feedback is known
to reduce Bayesian optimiser performance [1]. Additionally, the number of processing variables
(i.e. dimensions) in an experiment can increase the difficulty of finding an optimal material. To the
best of our knowledge, the literature has no empirical results or discussion on the impact of pending
experiments for SDLs.
37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).
arXiv:2312.03466v1  [cs.LG]  6 Dec 2023

Figure 1: (A) Schematic of an SDL with four stages. The robot arm moves experiments from stage to
stage. (B) In serial operation, the SDL performs each task in order and waits for one experiment to
finish before starting the next. (C) In asynchronous parallel ("conveyor belt") operation, the SDL
begins a new experiment as soon as the first stage is available. In this way, no stage is sitting idle
for a significant amount of time and the experimental throughput is significantly increased. In the
example above, 9 experiments are completed in asynchronous parallel operation in the same time it
took to complete 3 in serial operation. Asynchronous parallel operation, however, causes a delay in
the return of data as experiment N+3 must begin before experiment N is complete.
In this work, we fill this gap by building a simulator for a multi-stage SDL and comparing optimisation
strategies for handling delayed feedback from asynchronous parallelized operation. We compare
the performance of four optimisation strategies as well as compare their performance when subject
to different amounts of delay and different number of dimensions on various test functions. Our
simulation results showcase the trade-off between the efficiency gains of asynchronous parallel
operation and performance loss due to delayed feedback.
2
Setup and Experiments
We built a simulator for a multi-stage SDL and compare optimisation strategies for dealing with
delayed feedback and asynchronous parallelized operation. The simulator is based on the basic
Bayesian optimisation example in BoTorch [2]. The simulated experiments are performed by testing a
set of x-values on a synthetic experiment defined by a function. Noise is artificially added to the result
to mimic experimental noise. To mimic the effects of using multiple stages in asynchronous parallel,
the results are withheld from being returned until a predefined number of experiments have been
completed. A delay of N would represent the asynchronous parallel operation of an SDL with N+1
stages. It should be noted that SDLs can typically operate with any number of experiments running
in parallel, capped by the number of stages it has. With the simulator, we run synthetic experiments
on three different test functions that are supposed to represent different material’s behaviour:
(1) Ackley test function: an optimisation test function resembling a "needle-in-a-haystack" problem
[16] whose dimensions can be scaled up and down (Appendix Figure 5A and equation 1).
(2) Levy test function: a reasonably challenging common optimisation test function whose dimen-
sions can be scaled up and down (Appendix Figure 5B and equation 2).
(3) SDL test function: Using real SDL data from [15], we build a ground truth Gaussian Process
(GP)[14] model from 177 previously run SDL experiments for maximizing the conductivity of
functional coatings.
We choose the Ackley and Levy test functions as they are established benchmarks in the Bayesian
Optimisation literature [4, 7, 20], and also allow evaluation across increasing numbers of dimensions.
The SDL test function is designed to mimic the natural behaviour of functional coatings. In line with
classic benchmarks, normally distributed noise is added with standard deviation of 0.5 and 2e5 for
Ackley/Levy and SDL surfaces, respectively. Bounds for the x-dimensions of each surface can be
found in the Appendix. We then compare the following search strategies:
2

(A) Random: The worst-case baseline any strategy needs to beat. For each input parameter x, draw
a sample from a uniform probability distribution with upper and lower bounds determined by
the problem parameter space.
(B) Expected Improvement (EI): This is the classic EI implementation, using the analytic formula
for candidate calculation.
(C) Noisy Expected improvement (qNEI): This is the same as EI, but includes a model for the
observed noise, as is commonly assumed in practical applications.
(D) Mode cycling: as proposed by [15] whose data we use for our SDL test function. This method
cycles between the upper confidence bound (UCB) acquisition function and a space-filling
algorithm that selects a points furthest from all other points.
We choose the random search strategy as a worst-case baseline that every strategy should be able to
beat. EI is the most popular search strategy [9] and as such most relevant for comparison. qNEI is
used to showcase a search strategy that accounts for noise, the standard setting SDLs operate in. The
Mode-cycling is used to benchmark qNEI against a method that was used on a real-world SDL to
handle asynchronous parallelisation. To counter the sub-optimal throughput of asynchronous parallel
operation of a multi-stage SDL, we extend EI and qNEI with the implementation of a pending points
masks available in BoTorch [3]. This strategy modification prevents recommendation of candidates
that are running but have pending results. We expect EI and qNEI extended with the pending points
mask to yield the best performance across all strategies. For each simulation, we average over 30
optimisation trials, using ten random initial points and a total of 100 observations. We look at delays
∈{0, 1, 3, 5, 7} and dimensions ∈{3, 5, 7}, except for the SDL test function which is fixed at 7
dimensions. The length of the cycle in the Mode Cycle search strategy was varied depending on the
amount of delay used in the simulation trial. For a delay of 0, 1, and 3, the mode cycle search strategy
cycled between UCB with beta values 0.25, 2.5, and 25 and a space filling algorithm as described
in [15]. For a delay of 5, the mode cycle search strategy cycled between UCB with beta values 0.1,
0.25, 1, 2.5, and 25 and the space filling algorithm. For a delay of 7, the mode cycle search strategy
cycled between UCB with beta values 0.1, 0.25, 0.5, 1, 2, 4, and 10 and the space filling algorithm.
These choices are based on a heuristic approach to balance exploration and exploitation. For each
simulation, a dataset of all x-values and their resulting y-value found from the test function are saved
and analyzed.
3
Results & Discussion
First, the performance loss of the simulated SDL due to delayed feedback was validated. The simulator
was used to test the EI acquisition function on the SDL test function and the results are shown in
figure 2. The running best y-value is averaged over thirty trials and standard deviation is shown as the
shaded region. It can be observed that optimisations with no delay find the global maximum in the
fewest iterations on average. As the amount of delay increases, the number of iterations on average
required to reach the global max increases. It should be noted that observations occasionally exceed
the test function global maximum due to the addition of noise within the simulation. Exceeding
a theoretical limit may be possible in real experiments as there may be measurement noise which
may cause the observations to exceed the theoretical maximum. The cumulative regret was then
calculated and used as a metric of optimiser performance. The cumulative regret is calculated by
calculating the area between the running best average curve and the global maximum from the first
to the one hundredth observation. A lower cumulative regret is better because it means that the
area is smaller and the optimiser was able to reach the global maximum faster. It can be seen in
figure 2B that the cumulative regret increases as the amount of delay increases. Because delay is
associated with running experiments in asynchronous parallel, increased delay also typically means
increased experimental throughput. This figure clearly illustrate the trade-off between experimental
throughput and optimiser performance for an SDL operating experiments in asynchronous parallel.
An SDL operator must balance this trade-off. For an expensive experiment, an SDL operator may
choose to prioritize minimizing the number of experiments performed by running the SDL in serial
operation as this will increase the likelihood to reach the global maximum in fewer experiments. For
an inexpensive or exploratory experiment, it may be more practical to get as much data as possible
and prioritize experimental throughput by increasing the amount of experiments running in parallel.
3

Figure 2: (A) The EI acqusition function was used to optimise the SDL test function modeled using
real SDL data. The average running best y-value is shown up to 100 iterations and averaged over 30
trials. The shaded region represents the standard deviation of the running best value at each iteration.
(B) Cumulative regret was calculated by taking the area between the curve and the global maximum
from observation 0 to 99 for each running best in (A). Cumulative regret is analogous to average
optimiser performance, as a lower cumulative regret means that the optimiser has reached the global
maximum in less iterations. The cumulative regret increases as the amount of delay increases. The
average cumulative regret of the random baseline acquisition strategy is shown for comparison. The
error bars represent the standard deviation of the cumulative regret over all thirty iterations.
Figure 3: Cumulative regret for different optimisa-
tion strategies on the SDL test function. The error
bars represent the standard deviation of the cumu-
lative regret over all thirty trials. The x-position of
the data have been staggered to improve readability
of the error bars.
Two additional acquisition functions were tested
and compared: qNEI, to evaluate whether the
noisy version could perform better, and Mode-
Cycling, as proposed by Rupnow et al.[15] as a
way to reduce the repeated selection of identical
experiments caused by delayed feedback. The
cumulative regret of these tests are shown in 3.
It can be seen that EI, qNEI, and ModeCycle
all perform very similarly, with the cumulative
regret increasing as delay amount increases. As
expected, random sampling remains relatively
constant since it does not depend on prior data
to select new experiments. The average running
best plots for each acquisition function and delay
amount can be found in Appendix 7. To validate
that delay remains an issue on other optimisation
problems, the same simulations were performed
on the Ackley test function. Additionally, the
number of dimensions was varied to get a sense
of how dimensionality affects performance due
to delay. The cumulative regret for each search strategy on the Ackley test function are shown in
Figure 4. It can be seen that as delay increases, the cumulative regret also increases linearly. As the
dimensionality increases, the cumulative regret of EI, qNEI, and ModeCycle approach the cumulative
regret of random sampling. The average running best plots for each dimension and delay amount for
the Ackley function can be found in Appendix 8.
The cumulative regrets for each search strategy on the Levy test function are shown in Appendix
Figure 6. The results are very similar to those of the Ackley function. However, increasing the number
of dimensions in the Levy function significantly amplifies the cumulative regret. The average running
best plots for each dimension and delay amount for the Levy function can be found in Appendix 9.
4

Figure 4: Cumulative regret for different optimisation strategies on the Ackley test function in (A)
3, (B) 5, and (D) 7 dimensions. The error bars represent the standard deviation of the cumulative
regret over all thirty trials. The x-position of the data have been staggered to improve readability of
the error bars.
Our simulation results showcase the trade-off between the efficiency gains of asynchronous parallel
operation and performance loss due to delayed feedback. As expected, problems get harder with
increasing dimensionality. Additionally, as the number of parallel stages (i.e. delay) increases,
performance also decreases. As expected, all search strategies outperform the random strategy in all
cases. However, there is not enough evidence in our analysis to suggest that one acquisition strategy
performs better than another in the presence of delay, especially in higher dimensions. To find an
acquisition strategy that performs better in the presence of delayed feedback would require more trials
to be run, an increased maximum number of iterations, and compared to a wider range of acquisition
strategies. In the context of SDL operation, the decision whether to add delay to increase throughput
or to add a dimension to increase the search area seems problem dependent – both increase the
cumulative regret, though our tests found that adding delay seems to produce a smaller impact then
adding dimensions.
Limitations The results presented here represent a simulated SDL and not a real SDL. However,
we expect these results to hold true for a real SDL. It is important to remember, though, that the
results presented here represent the average performance of each strategy. An optimisation trial
on a real SDL may perform better or worse than average. Additionally, cumulative regret is not
the only metric for measuring optimiser performance. Optimisation algorithms have complicated
behaviour that should not necessarily be quantified by a single number. These results are true only
for the three test functions presented here. Results may vary when exploring other material spaces or
synthetic surfaces. Our work intends to guide SDL operators to use their machine more effectively
and efficiently. Improvements in optimisation strategies will lead to better mathematical optimisations,
but may or may not necessarily lead to higher performance materials found in fewer experiments.
Conclusion Considering the limited experimentation budgets commonly encountered in SDLs,
simulations are an effective way to test search strategies in advance of deployment on an SDL. In this
work we show that increasing throughput by running experiments in asynchronous parallel comes with
a trade-off of reducing the performance of Bayesian optimisation algorithms. We show that increasing
delay by adding stages to an SDL produces a smaller impact to optimisation performance then adding
dimensions to the materials problem space. We also compare a few different acquisition strategies,
but were inconclusive in determining a champion strategy. These results allow an SDL operator to
make informed recommendations on which search strategy to use and — on average — find the global
optimum faster than random guessing. As a next step, we are looking forward to collaborating on on
implementing and evaluating these algorithms in real-world SDLs, including globally interconnected
labs such as [11, 18] which face similar asynchronous parallelization challenges, to further refine
their search strategies and adjust them to specific applications. To facilitate this process, we are
making a plug-in pipeline for the pending points implementation available online1. This will allow
labs to easily access and integrate it into their SDLs.
1https://matterhorn.studio/pages/seminars/search-strategies-with-pending-points/
5

References
[1]
Ahsan Alvi et al. “Asynchronous Batch Bayesian Optimisation with Improved Local Penali-
sation”. In: Proceedings of the 36th International Conference on Machine Learning. Ed. by
Kamalika Chaudhuri and Ruslan Salakhutdinov. Vol. 97. Proceedings of Machine Learning
Research. PMLR, Sept. 2019, pp. 253–262. URL: https://proceedings.mlr.press/
v97/alvi19a.html.
[2]
BoTorch authors. Closed-loop batch, constrained BO in BoTorch with qEI and qNEI¶. 2021.
URL: https://botorch.org/tutorials/closed_loop_botorch_only.
[3]
Maximilian Balandat et al. “BoTorch: A Framework for Efficient Monte-Carlo Bayesian
Optimization”. In: Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems 33. 2020. URL: http:
//arxiv.org/abs/1910.06403.
[4]
Poompol Buathong et al. Bayesian Optimization of Function Networks with Partial Evaluations.
2023. arXiv: 2311.02146 [stat.ML].
[5]
Benjamin Burger et al. “A mobile robotic chemist”. In: Nature 583.7815 (2020), pp. 237–241.
[6]
Connor W. Coley et al. “A robotic platform for flow synthesis of organic compounds informed
by AI planning”. In: Science 365.6453 (2019), eaax1566. DOI: 10.1126/science.aax1566.
eprint: https://www.science.org/doi/pdf/10.1126/science.aax1566. URL:
https://www.science.org/doi/abs/10.1126/science.aax1566.
[7]
Mike Diessner et al. “Investigating Bayesian optimization for expensive-to-evaluate black
box functions: Application in fluid dynamics”. In: Frontiers in Applied Mathematics and
Statistics 8 (2022). ISSN: 2297-4687. DOI: 10.3389/fams.2022.1076296. URL: https:
//www.frontiersin.org/articles/10.3389/fams.2022.1076296.
[8]
Robert W. Epps et al. “Artificial Chemist: An Autonomous Quantum Dot Synthesis Bot”. In:
Advanced Materials 32.30 (2020), p. 2001626. DOI: https://doi.org/10.1002/adma.
202001626. eprint: https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/pdf/10.1002/adma.
202001626. URL: https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/abs/10.1002/adma.
202001626.
[9]
Peter I. Frazier. A Tutorial on Bayesian Optimization. 2018. arXiv: 1807.02811 [stat.ML].
[10]
Aldair E. Gongora et al. “A Bayesian experimental autonomous researcher for mechanical
design”. In: Science Advances 6.15 (2020), eaaz1708. DOI: 10.1126/sciadv.aaz1708.
eprint: https : / / www . science . org / doi / pdf / 10 . 1126 / sciadv . aaz1708. URL:
https://www.science.org/doi/abs/10.1126/sciadv.aaz1708.
[11]
Dan Guevarra et al. “Orchestrating nimble experiments across interconnected labs”. In: Chem-
Rxiv (2023). DOI: 10.26434/chemrxiv-2023-jgc8g.
[12]
Jeffrey Kirman et al. “Machine-Learning-Accelerated Perovskite Crystallization”. In: Matter
2.4 (2020), pp. 938–947. ISSN: 2590-2385. DOI: https://doi.org/10.1016/j.matt.
2020.02.012. URL: https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/
S2590238520300746.
[13]
B. P. MacLeod et al. “Self-driving laboratory for accelerated discovery of thin-film materials”.
In: Science Advances 6.20 (2020), eaaz8867. DOI: 10.1126/sciadv.aaz8867. eprint:
https://www.science.org/doi/pdf/10.1126/sciadv.aaz8867. URL: https:
//www.science.org/doi/abs/10.1126/sciadv.aaz8867.
[14]
Carl Edward Rasmussen and Christopher K. I. Williams. Gaussian processes for machine
learning. Adaptive computation and machine learning. MIT Press, 2006, pp. I–XVIII, 1–248.
ISBN: 026218253X.
[15]
Connor C Rupnow et al. “A self-driving laboratory optimizes a scalable process for making
functional coatings”. In: Cell Reports Physical Science 4.5 (2023).
[16]
Alexander E Siemenn et al. “Fast Bayesian optimization of Needle-in-a-Haystack problems
using zooming memory-based initialization (ZoMBI)”. In: npj Computational Materials 9.1
(2023), p. 79.
[17]
Kelsey L Snapp et al. “Autonomous Discovery of Tough Structures”. In: arXiv preprint
arXiv:2308.02315 (2023).
[18]
Felix Strieth-Kalthoff et al. “Delocalized, Asynchronous, Closed-Loop Discovery of Organic
Laser Emitters”. In: ChemRxiv (2023). DOI: 10.26434/chemrxiv-2023-wqp0d.
[19]
Sonja Surjanovic and Derek Bingham. “Virutal Library of Simulation Experiments”. In: Simon
Fraser University (2013). URL: http://www.sfu.ca/~ssurjano/ackley.html.
6

[20]
Jialei Wang et al. “Parallel Bayesian global optimization of expensive functions”. In: Opera-
tions Research 68.6 (2020), pp. 1850–1865.
4
Appendix
Acknowledgements Thank you to the workshop reviewers for their detailed feedback that allowed us
to improve and clarify our work. We are also grateful for the support for this work from the UKRI
Innovate UK Transformative Technologies Grant 2023 Series.
Ackley test function
f(x) = −a · exp

−b
v
u
u
t1
d
d
X
i=1
x2
i

−exp
 
1
d
d
X
i=1
cos(cxi)
!
+ a + exp(1)
(1)
where a, b, c are constants that control the characteristics of the function and d controls the dimen-
sionality of the input space. We used the packaged BoTorch version of the function which defines
a = 20, b = 0.2, and c = 2π. The bounds for the Ackley test function are [-32.768, 32.768] for all d.
The Ackley test function with d = 2 can be seen in Figure 5A
Levy test function
f(x) = sin2(πw1) +
d−1
X
i=1
(wi −1)2 
1 + 10 sin2(πwi + 1)

+ (wd −1)2 
1 + sin2(2πwd)

(2)
where wi(x) = 1 + xi−1
4
, for all i = 1, ..., d. The bounds for the Levy test function are [-10, 10] for
all d. The Levy test function with d = 2 can be seen in Figure 5B
(a) Ackley
(b) Levy
Figure 5: Both Ackley (A, eq. 1) and Levy (B, eq. 2) are comparatively challenging test functions
that easily extend to higher dimensions [19]. Ackley is challenging for hill climbing algorithms that
tend to get stuck in one of its many local minima, with its global minimum at f(x = 0) = 0. Levy is
similar to Ackley but not symmetric around its global minimum at f(x = 0) = 0 and is often used
to test algorithms aimed at handling high-dimensional problems with multiple local optima. In the
context of our simulator, we chose to maximize the negative of each function.
SDL test function
The SDL test function was based on a GP model built using training data from Rupnow et al. [15]
with a noise of 2e5 and fit using marginal log likelihood. The resulting model had cross validation r2
of 0.9907. The bounds for the SDL test function shown below in Table 1:
7

Table 1: Bounds for the SDL test function
input variable
lower bound
upper bound
units
x1
DMSO content
0
0.3
v/v
x2
precursor concentration
10
20
mg/mL
x3
spray flow rate
2
8
µL/s
x4
air flow rate
65
100
control valve %
x5
number of passes
1
10
passes
x6
spray height
10
25
mm
x7
hotplate temperature
220
300
°C
Levy Cumulative Regret
Figure 6: Cumulative regret for different optimisation strategies on the Levy test function in (A) 3,
(B) 5, and (D) 7 dimensions. The error bars represent the standard deviation of the cumulative regret
over all thirty trials. The x-position of the data have been staggered to improve readability of the error
bars.
8

Average running best optimisations
Figure 7: Average running best observation over 30 optimisation trials on the SDL test function
for delays ∈{0, 1, 3, 5, 7}. The line represents the mean running best observation while the shaded
region represents the standard deviation. The dashed line represents the global maximum.
9

Figure 8: Average running best observation over 30 optimisation trials on the Ackley test function
for delays ∈{0, 1, 3, 5, 7} and dimensions ∈{3, 5, 7}. The line represents the mean running best
observation while the shaded region represents the standard deviation. The dashed line represents the
global maximum.
10

Figure 9: Average running best observation over 30 optimisation trials on the Levy test function
for delays ∈{0, 1, 3, 5, 7} and dimensions ∈{3, 5, 7}. The line represents the mean running best
observation while the shaded region represents the standard deviation. The dashed line represents the
global maximum.
11
