arXiv:2504.17656v3  [cs.CE]  11 Jun 2025
polyGen - A Learning Framework for Atomic-level
Polymer Structure Generation
Ayush Jain
School of Materials Science and Engineering
Computational Science and Engineering
Georgia Institute of Technology
ayush.jain@gatech.edu
Rampi Ramprasad
School of Materials Science and Engineering
Georgia Institute of Technology
rampi.ramprasad@mse.gatech.edu
Abstract
Synthetic polymeric materials underpin fundamental technologies in the energy,
electronics, consumer goods, and medical sectors, yet their development still suf-
fers from prolonged design timelines. Although polymer informatics tools have
supported speedup, polymer simulation protocols continue to face significant chal-
lenges in the on-demand generation of realistic 3D atomic structures that respect
conformational diversity. Generative algorithms for 3D structures of inorganic
crystals, bio-polymers, and small molecules exist, but have not addressed synthetic
polymers because of challenges in representation and dataset constraints. In this
work, we introduce polyGen, the first generative model designed specifically for
polymer structures from minimal inputs such as the repeat unit chemistry alone.
polyGen combines graph-based encodings with a latent diffusion transformer using
positional biased attention for realistic conformation generation. Given the limited
dataset of 3,855 DFT-optimized polymer structures, we incorporate joint training
with small molecule data to enhance generation quality. We also establish structure
matching criteria to benchmark our approach on this novel problem. polyGen
overcomes the limitations of traditional crystal structure prediction methods for
polymers, successfully generating realistic and diverse linear and branched con-
formations, with promising performance even on challenging large repeat units.
As the first atomic-level proof-of-concept capturing intrinsic polymer flexibility, it
marks a new capability in material structure generation.
1
Introduction
Polymeric materials play a central role in modern science and engineering, enabling technologies
across sectors such as packaging, electronics, medicine, and energy. [1, 2] Their versatility arises from
the vast structural diversity of organic building blocks [3], the ingenuity of synthetic chemistry, and
the breadth of accessible processing techniques. By tuning parameters such as monomer composition,
chain architecture, additives, and processing conditions, polymers can be engineered to span a wide
range of mechanical, electrical, and transport properties—from rigid plastics, elastomers, dielectrics
[4], and membranes [5, 6, 7]. Despite the impact of polymers, the discovery and deployment of new
materials remains a slow and resource-intensive process. This is due to the vastness of chemical and
processing design spaces [8] and the need to balance performance, cost, safety, and manufacturability.
As a result, polymer innovation still relies heavily on experience, trial-and-error, chemical intuition,
and serendipity. Novel methods of generating polymer designs guided by informatics approaches have
emerged, such as virtual forward synthesis, evolutionary algorithms, and syntax-directed autoencoders
that can produce a theoretically innumerable amount of polymer candidates [9, 1, 10, 11]. Physics-
based computer simulations may accelerate the pace of polymer discovery but these methods also
Preprint. Under review.

Figure 1: Theoretical overview of polyGen from the perspective of chemistry-conditioned energy
minimization of the potential energy surface represented in the latent space. With this capability, an
initial connectivity for a polymer repeat unit can be used to generate structures with a high probability
of being at a potential energy minimum.
face barriers that have thus far prevented the widespread utilization of such approaches as detailed
below.
A key challenge faced by the polymer simulation community is the creation of suitable initial
atomic-level structures especially for novel chemistries. Unlike crystalline inorganic materials,
polymers exhibit a complex combination of amorphous, semicrystalline, and crystalline domains,
with conformational flexibility and structural disorder playing essential roles in their function [12].
Currently, Polymer Structure Predictor (PSP) [13] is a physics and heuristic-based framework that
can generate initial structures of polymers to be used as inputs to Density Functional Theory (DFT)
or Molecular Dynamics (MD) simulations. However, rapidly producing statistically diverse and
realistic conformations requires accounting for the many low-energy conformations that a polymer
can adopt. As illustrated in Figure 1, there is a growing need for predictive tools that can generate
realistic 3D atomic structures of polymers from minimal inputs, such as chemical composition or
connectivity (e.g., SMILES). Such tools would enable property prediction, surrogate simulation, and
rational design faster in the discovery pipeline.
Generative Materials Structure Prediction Materials generation via diffusion models [14] or flow
matching [15] offers promise. Typically, these models use datasets containing structures optimized by
DFT [16] or MD simulations [17]. With materials research, these methods have been used thus far for
inorganic crystalline materials with a finite number of atoms within a unit cell parameterized by the
lattice angles and lengths [18, 19, 20]. Significant progress has also emerged in structure prediction
for large biological polymers, particularly proteins, where models like AlphaFold [17, 21] and
Boltz-1 [22] can now generate accurate three-dimensional conformations from amino acid sequences.
Similarly, the generation of small molecule conformers [23, 24, 25] has also been an open problem,
especially in the context of protein docking [26].
The synthetic polymers generation problem is a mix of all of these applications. Similar to crystals,
synthetic polymers can be defined by a periodic unit. 3D structures of these repeat units are also
defined within unit cells/bounding boxes [12]. Traditional crystal structure prediction methods,
while powerful for smaller systems, have not displayed abilities to capture the rich conformational
landscape of polymers. The local features of synthetic polymers are more akin to molecules where
the local (short-range) connectivity of their structures is well-defined. However, polymers occur as
long chains composed of sequences of 10s-10,000s of monomeric repeat units, which necessitates
an understanding of longer-range interactions for stochastic structure generation. This is similar to
protein modeling approaches like AlphaFold3, which employs diffusion transformers to predict an
ensemble of structures [21]. However, unlike proteins, which have a consistent backbone (a sequence
of repeating N −Cα −C, where Cα is the centrally located carbon in the amino acid residue) and
a finite set of amino acids, synthetic polymers boast a limitless design space to draw their repeat
units and backbones from [1, 2]. Additionally, proteins and molecules are aperiodic and non-periodic,
respectively. In combination with the aforementioned challenges, polymer structure datasets from
MD or DFT have only recently been standardized and have not seen the scale required for generative
modeling [12]. Moreover, past work [27] in general may overlook the need of representing chain
level [12], amorphous [28, 5], and network systems [29], in simulations using periodic boundary
conditions.
2

Figure 2: The training and generation process for polyGen. a) First, an autoencoder with conditional
encoder EC, encoder E, and decoder D is trained to learn an atom-wise latent space by reconstructing
the system as a bounding box ˆbz, fractional coordinates fi, and cartesian coordinates pi. In this
process, an atom-wise conditioning Ci is learned. b) The diffusion model M is trained within this
latent space, iteratively denoising a gaussian random latent ˆz0
i into a new distribution ˆzT
i that is likely
a valid polymer conformation. c) During post-generation filtering, a structure is calculated from the
predicted positions, and can be used if connectivity and bonding are preserved.
The complexity of polymer design and representation, combined with limited available data, explains
why generative models for polymers have remained largely unexplored until now. We introduce
polyGen (Figure 2), the first latent diffusion model specifically designed to generate periodic and
stochastic polymeric structures. We build upon latent diffusion frameworks for materials generation
such as All-Atom DiT [30]. Our problem and approach are modified to predict an ensemble of
low-energy polymer conformations conditioned on a specified repeat unit with prescribed atomic
connectivities rather than performing unconstrained de novo structure generation. Our method lever-
ages a molecular encoding that captures atomic connectivity, which is used as a conditioning signal
throughout the model architecture. We adopt a latent diffusion strategy over joint diffusion methods
such as DiffCSP [18] or molecular generation methods in Cartesian space [23] due to the strong
coupling between atomic positions and box dimensions imposed by polymer connectivity constraints.
We augment our dataset with smaller structures from DFT-optimized molecules, demonstrating
improved polymer structure prediction capabilities owing to the shared weights of a dataset invariant
encoder and decoder, and a shared latent space. This work culminates in a learning framework that
can generate ensembles of realistic polymer chain conformations. To benchmark the quality of these
conformations, we introduce rigorous evaluation criteria on bonds, angles, and dihedrals—standards
that, to our knowledge, have not yet been applied in the context of materials generation. This appli-
cation represents a novel proof-of-concept to predict atomic-level synthetic polymer conformations
while accounting for their intrinsic flexibility and the distribution of plausible structures.
3

2
Results
2.1
Dataset and Evaluation Metrics
The main dataset, polyChainStructures, consists of 3855 DFT-optimized infinite polymer chain
structures, with a maximum of 208 atoms, including hydrogens. Further details of this already
open-sourced dataset, as well as DFT methods can be found in [12]. We use a 3084/386/385
(train/validation/test) split for the polyChainStructures dataset. The QM9 dataset, which contains
DFT-optimized small-molecule conformations, is used to augment the training, allowing the models
to learn local patterns from molecular structures. We use the train set from QM9 [25] which is a size
of 100K molecules. We acknowledge the presence of larger molecular datasets (i.e., GEOM) that
could be used to further augment our model’s learning [31]. However, from a structural perspective,
the conformational behavior of non-zero temperature molecules found in GEOM differs significantly
from the idealized infinite chains at 0K modeled in this work.
We benchmark polymer structure prediction on our polyChainStructures test set with our method.
Unlike crystals, polymers are amorphous and can adopt many valid low-energy conformations,
making conventional structure matching [32] unsuitable. Molecule generation is also evaluated
with root mean squared distance after rotational alignment [24, 33], but this doesn’t account for
conformational variability experienced by infinite chains.
To this end, we compare the predicted conformations against the DFT-optimized structures by
examining distributions over bond lengths, bond angles, and dihedrals. We quantify similarity using
the forward Kullback–Leibler (KL) divergence from the predicted distribution to the ground truth.
The task is to generate a distribution of plausible polymer conformations and assess the likelihood
that the DFT-optimized structure could have been drawn from this predicted distribution. For a set of
predicted quantities Qpred we match it to the set of DFT predicted quantities QDFT with
LKL = DKL (QDFT ∥Qpred) =
Z
QDFT(z) log QDFT(z)
Qpred(z) dz
(1)
In practice, we do this over a discrete set of buckets where dz is 0.001 of the predefined ranges of the
quantities, which could be bond lengths (0.9 to 2.0), angles (0 to 180), or dihedrals (0 to 360).
2.2
Structure Matching Results
We find that our model is capable of predicting polymer structures that closely match the linear
chain structure calculated by DFT. To provide context to our rationale, Figure 3 shows examples of
predicted polymers compared to the ground truth of the dataset. In Figure 3a-d we see the capabilities
of generating systems with qualitatively similar structures after filtering. We also provide examples
of errors that are caught by our filtering. In Figure 3a and c, we see examples of carbon atoms
incorrectly predicted within a supposedly aromatic ring in the backbone, which lead to incorrect
connectivity. Many failed structures, especially the one in Figure 3b, can easily be fixed with an
energy minimization or a heuristic-based increasing of the C-H bond, demonstrating the efficacy of
the remaining generation and the stringent nature of the generation filter. Also, the complexity of
these structures should be noted, given chain size, branching, and the number of rings present.
4

Figure 3: Visual samples from 100 generations per polymer type. Each row (a-d) displays examples
from a single polymer. The ground truth, a successfully generated sample, and an unsuccessful sample
are provided. The unsuccessful samples highlight the errors that caused the incorrect connectivity.
Note that the structures for b) and c) are replicated along the z-axis for visual clarity of the structure.
The visualizations are accompanied by corresponding ground truth distributions (top) and model-
predicted distributions (bottom) of molecular bonds, angles, and dihedrals for that polymer.
To quantify structural similarity, we compare bond length, triplet angle, and dihedral angle distribu-
tions for some atomic species. Predicted structures should exhibit peaks comparable to optimized
structures. The forward KL divergences establish benchmarks for acceptable "matches" in bond
lengths, angles, and dihedrals.
We find that our approach can find relative trends in the majority of bond lengths, but lacks precision.
For example, the predicted C-O bonds in Figure 3a shows 2 peaks for single and double bonds, with
noisy predictions scattered by at least 0.1 Å around these peaks. In Figure 3b and c, both predicted
C-N and C-S bond distributions show peaks corresponding with the true bond length, but with wide
distributions. Generation is precise to the order of Å, but not on the scale of picometers. Precision
on the level of picometers will be necessary to properly distinguish between bond types before our
approach is scaled to larger system sizes.
We find that the distribution peaks of angles and dihedrals match the ground truth peaks, especially
the O-C-O and O-S-O bonds in Figure 3a and c, respectively. The dihedral distributions can be
used to validate the prediction of correct local structures in the polymer. For example, the C-N-C-C
dihedrals in Figure 3b validate the feasible prediction of the nitrogen containing 5-membered ring
5

in the backbone. In Figure 3c, the C-C-C-O dihedral, located on a branch, shares a peak with the
ground truth at 160◦but has a few predictions around 80◦and 320◦. This reflects the difficulties in
generating branched structures, which may have conformational variability.
Figure 3d shows predictions for the largest system in the test dataset, containing 208 atoms. Only 3
out of 100 generated structures pass the filtering when using position-biased attention, while the DiT
model with vanilla attention fails to produce any valid structure. The broad distribution of predicted
C–N–C–O dihedral angles and their high deviation from the ground truth further highlight the lack of
conformational viability. These results underscore a clear limitation in handling larger systems, likely
due to constraints in the training dataset, and illustrate the challenges of generating feasible structures
for complex polymer repeat units.
Figure 4: a) Demonstration of diverse structures generated from polyGen for the same repeat
unit, compared to the ground truth structure. b) The ground truth dihedrals (top) compared to the
distributions of the full generated ensemble (bottom) along with the KL Divergence. For reference,
the structures are generated from the polymer repeat unit in Figure 1.
2.3
Prediction of Diverse Samples
As highlighted earlier, polymer structures do not reside in one fixed conformation but occur as
an ensemble of minimized conformations, even close to 0 K. Our training dataset contains only 1
conformational example out of the potential ones, because the generation of these ensembles is costly.
A useful generation model would produce a diverse ensemble of conformations representative of
many possible low-energy states. In Figure 4b, despite the lack of per-polymer distribution in our
dataset, polyGen can generate an ensemble of diverse structures with variable repeat unit lengths.
Moreover, these samples pass the post-generation filtering and remain consistent with structural
features in the DFT ground truth, as seen in the KL Divergences in Figure 4b.
6

2.4
Overall Results
Following previous works, we also see that joint training on multiple DFT datasets can improve
model performance [30, 16]. In this section, we show the specific areas in which the inclusion of
the QM9 dataset can benefit the generation of polymer structures by comparing the joint dataset
approach with a model fully trained on just the polyChainStructures dataset. Figure 5 shows the
overall KL divergences for bond lengths, angle lengths, and dihedrals, and comparison of predicted
z-height. The inclusion of the QM9 dataset improves predictions on the local levels of polymer
chains, as the KL divergences of bonds and angles decrease by 41.0% and 29.0%, respectively, upon
the addition of the QM9 dataset. Larger features, such as dihedral angles and the z-height show
limited improvement, with dihedrals improving by 16.1%. This is likely because small molecules do
not provide any insight into the macrostructural properties of polymers. Overall, we find that 36.1%
of the generated structures by the jointly trained model pass our filtering, whereas 27.4% samples are
generated correctly when using only the polyChainStructures dataset for training.
Another major improvement is seen when including position attention biasing (Section 4.4.1) in the
DiT module. Because local interactions are explicitly specified, we find that the positional encoding
improves generation success from 36.9% to 64.8% when looking at isomorphism of the predicted
structure compared to the original graph. Figure 5 showcases the improvement of polyGen with a
relative encoding bias on all metrics, notably the decrease of angle and dihedral KL Divergences by
33.5% and 21.2%, respectively.
As highlighted in Figure 5d and discussed in Section 2.3, we expect some variability in the prediction
of the z-height of the polymer chain. Despite this, we can achieve an r2 score of 0.854 between the
predicted and DFT heights, meaning that the model can differentiate between dense vs. sparsely
packed structures. Additionally, we see a larger standard deviation and error in predictions for larger
repeat units (> 10 Å), because these repeat units may show more flexibility. Figure 5e also highlights
the difficulty of generation as system size increases. Most generated systems with <25 atoms show
success rates > 0.5. For system sizes greater than 150 atoms, the model with vanilla attention cannot
generate any systems with proper connectivity, but the relative position bias substantially improves
this.
Intuitively, it would also seem that complex polymeric structures would be more difficult to generate.
To this end, we also compare these metrics with the Synthetic Accessibility (SA) in Supplementary
Information A. We see loose correlations with KL divergences of bond length, angles, and dihedrals
with the SA score, but the ratio of successful generations of a polymer do not have a strong correlation
Figure 5: KL Divergences of Joint training for Position Bias, Joint Training and polyChainStructures
Only for a) Bonds b) Angles and c) Dihedrals. d) The comparison of z-height prediction vs the DFT
ground truth. e) The success rate of filtering as a function of the atom count of the system.
7

with the SA score. Therefore, generation success could be independent from SA score and more
reliant on the system size.
3
Discussion
In this study, we introduce a solution to the problem of atomic-level polymer structure genera-
tion—given only the atomic connectivity of a repeat unit (i.e. SMILES), polyGen can generate an
ensemble of realistic 3D structures of synthetic polymers. Results demonstrate that polyGen effec-
tively generates structures with bond lengths, angles, and dihedral distributions that align well with
ground truth structures, and the quality of structures improves with the inclusion of positional biasing
to the attention mechanism of the diffusion transformer. The model also successfully generates
valid conformations for complex features like aromatic backbones and branches while correlating
repeat unit chemistry with structural properties, such as repeat unit length. These initial results are
particularly promising considering our polymer structure dataset optimized with Density Functional
Theory contains only 3855 systems. We also investigate the limitations and demonstrate the need for
stringent benchmarking of future polymer structure generation techniques. While capturing relative
trends in structure, the model lacks precision at the picometer scale needed to definitively distinguish
between bond types. Performance degrades significantly for larger polymeric systems, likely due
to dataset constraints. Finally, the consistency of feasible generation needs to be improved. Given
the successes of this proof-of-concept, future work will focus on expanding the training dataset to
include larger polymer systems, incorporating additional physics-informed constraints, and exploring
hybrid approaches that combine latent diffusion with molecular dynamics simulations. Addressing
these challenges could transform polyGen into an invaluable tool for computational materials science,
accelerating the discovery of novel polymeric materials across numerous applications.
4
Methods
polyGen consists of three phases, a 0D conditioning on the molecular graph of the desired polymer
repeat unit chemical structure, a variational autoencoder for structure (Figure 2a), and a latent diffusion
module (Figure 2b). Overall, we choose an architecture that does not include any equivariance or
inductive biases, following the sentiment of recent works [30, 21] where data scale and augmentation
can be a path to learning these more efficiently.
4.1
Polymer Structure Specification
Several previous works have learned structural and chemical representations of periodic materials,
which include fractional coordinates, unit cell lengths, and lattice angles. For single polymer chain
structures, we take a modified approach. Because of their complexity, training set structures are
optimized using DFT with a periodic orthogonal box where the chain is continuous through the z
axis. The width of the box is needed to encapsulate side chains/branched structures and are made
large enough to isolate the single chain during optimization.
We note that the x and y axis are not entirely polymer structure dependent. Including these as
prediction variables is an overparameterization, and does not contribute much information. Therefore,
we fix the x and y of the box to a 55 Å x 55 Å box, and define the system by the z height of the box,
bz. In theory, this quantity is a proxy for the system’s density (which is also stochastic, depending on
the specific sampled configurations). Atomic positions are provided as fractional coordinates within
this orthogonal bounding box.
4.2
Graph Conditioning
The generation of polymer structures begins with a minimal representation of atomic connectivity,
typically provided in the form of a SMILES string. This string is converted into a molecular graph:
periodic for polymers and non-periodic for small molecules. To extract a universal atom-wise
representation, denoted as Ci, we apply a graph conditioning module that encodes the molecular
connectivity. As illustrated in Figure 2a and b, Ci serves as contextual input to the encoder, decoder,
and diffusion modules. The graph conditioning module is implemented using a graph interaction
network, similar to [34], which captures local chemical environments by modeling interactions
8

between different atom and bond types. Importantly, the same network weights are used across
all datasets and connectivity types, facilitating effective transfer learning and generalization across
chemical spaces.
Given a graph G = (V, E), each node i ∈V is associated with an atom type and positional encodings,
and each edge (i, j) ∈E is associated with a bond type. The initial node and edge embeddings are
computed as:
h(0)
i
= Embed(atom_typei),
e(0)
ij = Embed(bond_typeij),
h(0)
i
= MLP([h(0)
i ; rRW
i
; rLap
i
])
(2)
For each layer l = 1, . . . , L, we update the edges and the nodes as:
e(l)
ij = e(l−1)
ij
We + f (l)
e (LN([e(l−1)
ij
; h(l−1)
i
; h(l−1)
j
]))
m(l)
i
=
X
j∈N(i)
e(l)
ij ,
h(l)
i
= h(l−1)
i
Wv + f (l)
v (LN([m(l)
i ; h(l−1)
i
]))
(3)
We finally node features to add global context for the whole molecule:
g =
X
i∈V
h(L)
i
,
Ci = f (l)
f ([g; h(L)
i
])
(4)
where f (l)
e , f (l)
v , f (l)
f
are MLPs, LN is layer normalization, rRW
i
is a random walk positional encoding
[35] of size 16 and rLap
i
is a Laplacian positional encoding [36, 37] of size 2. We use L = 4 to capture
local interactions of an atom 1 "hop" away from its furthest dihedral. The global pooling prior to
embedding into token dimension is done so that atomic-level information is taken with global system
information.
The encoder, decoder, and diffusion modules are all transformers, which typically require a positional
encoding to identify token ordering and condition the self-attention weights. Similar to contemporary
graph transformer methods, Ci communicates this by providing embeddings calculated from rRW
i
and rLap
i
[38].
4.3
Structural Variational AutoEncoder
The next step is to learn a way to combine all aspects of a polymer system, such as monomer chemistry,
fractional coordinates, and the bounding box, into a joint space. This space should also allow the
fusion of information from small molecules or other systems to enhance learning. We employ a VAE
to create unified atom-wise latent representation that contains structural details for small molecules
and polymers, Z ∈Rd where d is a latent dimension. The VAE is based on traditional graph VAEs,
including an encoder E and a decoder D operating atom-wise.
The structure of the molecule/polymer is given through a concatenated vector of fractional coordinates
fi and Cartesian positions pi. For a polymer structure, both the fi and scaled pi according to the
bounding box are provided. This forces the VAE to learn and reconstruct the relationship between the
Cartesian positions, fractional coordinates, and the bounding box. For non-periodic molecules, pi
is provided and fi = ∅, which allows periodic and non-periodic materials to share the same latent
space, similar to [30]. The atom-wise latent space is then calculated along with the Ci.
µi, σi = E(fi, pi, Ci)
(5)
Zi ∼N(µi, σi)
(6)
The decoder then produces a structure from Z,
ˆfi, ˆpi,ˆbz = D(Z, Ci)
(7)
where ˆfi is the predicted fractional coordinates, ˆpi is the predicted cartesian coordinates, and ˆbz is
the z direction height of the bounding box. The loss on the decoder is used to optimize the model
9

Ltotal = ⟨wbbox · Lbbox⟩+ ⟨wfrac_coords · Lfrac_coords⟩+ ⟨wpos · Lpos⟩
+ ⟨wkl · Lkl⟩+ ⟨wbond · Lbond⟩+ ⟨wangle · Langle⟩+ ⟨wdihedral · Ldihedral⟩
(8)
Where the reconstruction terms are defined as:
Lbbox = MSE
 ˆbz, bz/(10
3√
N)

,
Lfrac_coords = 1
d
X
i
MSE( ˆfi, fi),
Lpos = 1
d
X
i
MSE
 ˆpi −⟨ˆp⟩, pi −⟨p⟩

,
Lkl = KL
 qϕ(z | x) ∥p(z)

.
And the structural loss terms are:
Lbond = MSE(dij, ˆdij)
Langle = MSE(∠ijk, ˆ∠ijk)
Ldihedral = (∆periodic(τijkl, ˆτijkl))2
Where:
dij, ˆdij = bond length between atoms i and j with true/predicted coordinates
∠ijk, ˆ∠ijk = angle between bonded atoms i-j-k with true/predicted coordinates
τijkl, ˆτijkl = dihedral angle of atoms i-j-k-l with true/predicted coordinates
∆periodic = periodic difference within 0-2π radians, N = number of atoms
The inclusion of the structural loss is to help the VAE optimize to decode structures that are structurally
similar to the target, even if the positions may be slightly different than the target. Similar approaches
for enforcing local atomic relations are utilized in works concerning biological polymer structures
[21, 39]. Final model hyperparameters are provided in Supplementary Information C.
4.4
Diffusion Transformer
Now that a joint latent space is learned, we require a way to find suitable structures for new polymer
chemistries. We use a DiT architecture for our generative model M, operating within the latent space
Z learned by the VAE. We use a similar DiT architecture as ADiT [30], however the previous work
uses sinusoidal positional encodings for atomic tokens, which make it difficult for unordered atomic
representations. In our case, we want to preserve the permutation invariant qualities of a GNN, so we
use the positional encoded features and interactions in Ci to provide positional information relative
to other atoms in the system. We also modify the attention mechanism to add a bias towards bonds,
elaborated in Section 4.4.1.
Our denoiser is implemented through a gaussian flow matching approach, which is equivalent to
denoising diffusion as one can be derived from the other [40, 30]. We start by encoding a DFT
optimized structure into the latent space, using Equation 6, to get Z1. Similar to other latent
diffusion/flow matching works we denoise from zero-centered random noise Z0 ∼N(0, 1) at t = 0
to Z1 at t = 1 [30]. To train the transformer, we provide it with an interpolated sample Zt at a
random timestep t ∼U(0, 1),
Zt = (1 −t)Z0 + tZ1
(9)
We can pose the learning problem as the linear ordinary differential equation (ODE),
ut = ˙Z(Zt) = Z1 −Zt
1 −t
(10)
The final prediction task is defined as,
ˆZ1 = M(Zt, Zsc, t, Ci, S),
ˆut =
ˆZ1 −Zt
1 −t
where S is an embedding that represents the dataset used during generation. This is used exclusively
during joint training. Only the embedding for the polyChainStructures dataset is used during
inference. Zsc denotes a self-conditioning input, which corresponds to a previous prediction of
ˆZ1. Self-conditioning improves autoregressive molecular generation [41, 30]. Our training uses a
10

two-pass approach: first predicting ˆZ1 with Zsc = ∅, then feeding this prediction back as Zsc for
refinement. To avoid overreliance, we randomly drop self-conditioning (Zsc = ∅) with probability
0.5 during training. Within M, the latent features and conditioning signals are incorporated as
˜x = EZ([Zt; Zsc]) + Ci,
c = d + Et(t),
where ˜x is input and c is the modulation conditioning for attention blocks from [? ]. EZ and Et are
embedding blocks.
The training objective is defined as the atom-wise mean squared error between ˆut
(i) and u(i)
t
for N
atoms in a system:
LG = 1
N
N
X
i=1
u(i)
t
−ˆu(i)
t

2
(11)
= 1
N
N
X
i=1

Z(i)
1
−Z(i)
t
1 −t
−
ˆZ(i)
1
−Z(i)
t
1 −t

2
(12)
=
1
(1 −t)2 · 1
N
N
X
i=1
Z(i)
1
−ˆZ(i)
1

2
(13)
To prevent numerical instability in the loss function calculation, we clip the value of t to 0.9, in
accordance with previous work [30].
During inference, we sample an initial latent Z0 ∼N(0, I) and iteratively denoise it using T steps
of Euler integration:
Zt+∆t = Zt + ∆tˆut,
where ∆t = 1.0/T. This process generates a final conformation ˆZ1, which is decoded into a novel
3D atomic system using D. We compare generation hyperparameters in Supplementary Information
B, and show final model hyperparameters in Supplementary Information C.
4.4.1
Relative Positional Encoding Attention Modification
With a traditional attention mechanism, DiT is forced to learn bonding relationships from the atom-
wise conditional embeddings. For smaller systems, this can provide enough information for proper
structure prediction, but this may be a problem for larger systems. Alphafold3, which operates on
larger atomic systems than traditional material structure generation models, utilizes a pairformer [21]
with a relative position encoding to allow tokens to attend to nearby neighbors by conditioning the
attention weights of the diffusion module.
We employ a lightweight relative positional encoding with attention biasing mechanism in the
polyGen DiT module to differentiate local atomic interactions from global. First, we encode pairwise
relationships with a one-hot graph-distance tensor
D ∈{0, 1}N×N×5,
where each of the five channels indicates whether atoms i and j are
(1) identical
(2) bonded
(3) separated by an angle
(4) separated by a dihedral
(5) beyond four bonds apart
An MLP fD then maps each one-hot vector Di,j to a scalar bias, which is added directly into the
scaled dot-product attention:
11

biasi,j = fD
 Di,j

,
(14)
Attentioni,j = Softmax

Qi · Kj
√num_heads + biasi,j

.
(15)
Intuitively, nearby atoms (bonds, angles, dihedrals) should have a higher bias and other atoms should
have a lower bias. With a per-DiT-block learnable bias, the DiT has the ability to allocate more
attention weight while still retaining the ability to attend globally in some layers.
4.5
Post-Generation Filtering
Often, sampling from a flow matching or diffusion model can lead to unphysical generations. In
Figure 2c, we show post-generation filtering as a sanity check of generation. First, we take the final
predicted system (atom_typei,ˆbz, ˆfi) and use the Cartesian distances between atoms to calculate the
predicted structure, ˆG = (V, ˆE). If the ground truth graph G and the predicted graph ˆG are isomorphic,
i.e., whether G ∼= ˆG, then it passes the filter. If any bond length is < 0.8 then the sample is filtered out.
Samples that pass this filtering criteria will be "successful" and those that don’t are "unsuccessful."
However, a successful prediction of connectivity doesn’t guarantee an accurate 3D structure, and the
successful samples are evaluated against the optimized 3D structures in Section 2.
4.6
Machine Learning Techniques
Our main polymer DFT dataset, polyChainStructures (elaborated in Section 2.1), and the QM9
dataset are imbalanced, with the latter training set being ≈33x larger. To handle this we upsample
the polyChainStructures data by 30x per epoch. During training for the polychain dataset only, this
upsampling ratio is held the same for comparison, so that both models see the same amount of
polyChainStructures data per epoch. To learn equivariance, we randomly rotate and translate the
systems at every training step for both the VAE and the DiT.
The autoencoder models were trained for 300 epochs, and the highest-performing validation check-
point was taken. The diffusion models were trained for a maximum of 500 epochs.
5
Data Availability
The dataset used in this study is available on the Ramprasad group’s computational knowledge-base,
Khazana (https://khazana.gatech.edu/dataset).
6
Code Availability
The code used for this work will be made publicly available upon publication on the Ramprasad
group’s github (https://github.com/Ramprasad-Group)
7
Acknowledgements
This work was financially supported by the Office of Naval Research (ONR) through Grant N00014-
21-1-2258 and the National Science Foundation (NSF) DMREF Grant 2323695. A.J. acknowledges
S. Shukla, A. Savit, H. Sahu, H. Tran, and R. Gurnani for valuable discussions.
8
Author Contributions
A.J. is the main architect of the models and wrote the paper. R.R. conceived the project and guided
the work and the previous project for dataset generation.
9
Competing Interests
R.R. is a founder of Matmerize, Inc., a company specializing in materials informatics software and
services. The other authors have no conflicts of interest to declare.
12

References
[1] Huan Tran, Rishi Gurnani, Chiho Kim, Ghanshyam Pilania, Ha-Kyung Kwon, Ryan P Lively, and Rampi
Ramprasad. Design of functional and sustainable polymers assisted by artificial intelligence. Nature
Reviews Materials, pages 1–21, 2024.
[2] Rohit Batra, Le Song, and Rampi Ramprasad. Emerging materials intelligence ecosystems propelled by
machine learning. Nature Reviews Materials, 6(8):655–678, 2021.
[3] Shivank S Shukla, Christopher Kuenneth, and Rampi Ramprasad. Polymer informatics beyond homopoly-
mers. arXiv preprint arXiv:2303.12938, 2023.
[4] Rishi Gurnani, Stuti Shukla, Deepak Kamal, Chao Wu, Jing Hao, Christopher Kuenneth, Pritish Aklujkar,
Ashish Khomane, Robert Daniels, Ajinkya A Deshmukh, et al. Ai-assisted discovery of high-temperature
dielectrics for energy storage. Nature Communications, 15(1):6107, 2024.
[5] Brandon K Phan, Kuan-Hsuan Shen, Rishi Gurnani, Huan Tran, Ryan Lively, and Rampi Ramprasad. Gas
permeability, diffusivity, and solubility in polymers: Simulation-experiment data fusion and multi-task
machine learning. npj Computational Materials, 10(1):186, 2024.
[6] Lihua Chen, Ghanshyam Pilania, Rohit Batra, Tran Doan Huan, Chiho Kim, Christopher Kuenneth, and
Rampi Ramprasad. Polymer informatics: Current status and critical next steps. Materials Science and
Engineering: R: Reports, 144:100595, 2021.
[7] Huan Doan Tran, Chiho Kim, Lihua Chen, Anand Chandrasekaran, Rohit Batra, Shruti Venkatram, Deepak
Kamal, Jordan P Lightstone, Rishi Gurnani, Pranav Shetty, et al. Machine-learning predictions of polymer
properties with polymer genome. Journal of Applied Physics, 128(17):171104, 2020.
[8] Rishi Gurnani, Christopher Kuenneth, Aubrey Toland, and Rampi Ramprasad. Polymer informatics at
scale with multitask graph neural networks. Chemistry of Materials, 35(4):1560–1567, 2023.
[9] Joseph Kern, Yongliang Su, Will Gutekunst, and Rampi Ramprasad. An informatics framework for the
design of sustainable, chemically recyclable, synthetically-accessible and durable polymers. arXiv preprint
arXiv:2409.15354, 2024.
[10] Joseph Kern, Lihua Chen, Chiho Kim, and Rampi Ramprasad. Design of polymers for energy storage
capacitors using machine learning and evolutionary algorithms. Journal of Materials Science, 56:19623–
19635, 2021.
[11] Rohit Batra, Hanjun Dai, Tran Doan Huan, Lihua Chen, Chiho Kim, Will R Gutekunst, Le Song, and Rampi
Ramprasad. Polymers for extreme conditions designed using syntax-directed variational autoencoders.
Chemistry of Materials, 32(24):10489–10500, 2020.
[12] Tran Doan Huan and Rampi Ramprasad. Polymer structure prediction from first principles. The Journal of
Physical Chemistry Letters, 11(15):5823–5829, 2020.
[13] Harikrishna Sahu, Kuan-Hsuan Shen, Joseph H Montoya, Huan Tran, and Rampi Ramprasad. Polymer
structure predictor (psp): a python toolkit for predicting atomic-level structural models for a range of
polymer geometries. Journal of Chemical Theory and Computation, 18(4):2737–2748, 2022.
[14] Ling Yang, Zhilong Zhang, Yang Song, Shenda Hong, Runsheng Xu, Yue Zhao, Wentao Zhang, Bin Cui,
and Ming-Hsuan Yang. Diffusion models: A comprehensive survey of methods and applications. ACM
Computing Surveys, 56(4):1–39, 2023.
[15] Yaron Lipman, Ricky TQ Chen, Heli Ben-Hamu, Maximilian Nickel, and Matt Le. Flow matching for
generative modeling. arXiv preprint arXiv:2210.02747, 2022.
[16] Richard Tran, Janice Lan, Muhammed Shuaibi, Brandon M Wood, Siddharth Goyal, Abhishek Das, Javier
Heras-Domingo, Adeesh Kolluru, Ammar Rizvi, Nima Shoghi, et al. The open catalyst 2022 (oc22) dataset
and challenges for oxide electrocatalysts. ACS Catalysis, 13(5):3066–3084, 2023.
[17] John Jumper, Richard Evans, Alexander Pritzel, Tim Green, Michael Figurnov, Olaf Ronneberger, Kathryn
Tunyasuvunakool, Russ Bates, Augustin Žídek, Anna Potapenko, et al. Highly accurate protein structure
prediction with alphafold. nature, 596(7873):583–589, 2021.
[18] Rui Jiao, Wenbing Huang, Peijia Lin, Jiaqi Han, Pin Chen, Yutong Lu, and Yang Liu. Crystal structure
prediction by joint equivariant diffusion. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 36:17464–
17497, 2023.
[19] Tian Xie, Xiang Fu, Octavian-Eugen Ganea, Regina Barzilay, and Tommi Jaakkola. Crystal diffusion
variational autoencoder for periodic material generation. arXiv preprint arXiv:2110.06197, 2021.
[20] Benjamin Kurt Miller, Ricky TQ Chen, Anuroop Sriram, and Brandon M Wood. Flowmm: Generating
materials with riemannian flow matching. In Forty-first International Conference on Machine Learning,
2024.
13

[21] Josh Abramson, Jonas Adler, Jack Dunger, Richard Evans, Tim Green, Alexander Pritzel, Olaf Ronneberger,
Lindsay Willmore, Andrew J Ballard, Joshua Bambrick, et al. Accurate structure prediction of biomolecular
interactions with alphafold 3. Nature, 630(8016):493–500, 2024.
[22] Jeremy Wohlwend, Gabriele Corso, Saro Passaro, Mateo Reveiz, Ken Leidal, Wojtek Swiderski, Tally
Portnoi, Itamar Chinn, Jacob Silterra, Tommi Jaakkola, et al. Boltz-1: Democratizing biomolecular
interaction modeling. bioRxiv, pages 2024–11, 2024.
[23] Majdi Hassan, Nikhil Shenoy, Jungyoon Lee, Hannes Stärk, Stephan Thaler, and Dominique Beaini.
Et-flow: Equivariant flow-matching for molecular conformer generation. Advances in Neural Information
Processing Systems, 37:128798–128824, 2024.
[24] Minkai Xu, Alexander Powers, Ron Dror, Stefano Ermon, and Jure Leskovec. Geometric latent diffusion
models for 3d molecule generation, 2023. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2305.01140.
[25] Zhenqin Wu, Bharath Ramsundar, Evan N Feinberg, Joseph Gomes, Caleb Geniesse, Aneesh S Pappu,
Karl Leswing, and Vijay Pande. Moleculenet: a benchmark for molecular machine learning. Chemical
science, 9(2):513–530, 2018.
[26] Gabriele Corso, Hannes Stärk, Bowen Jing, Regina Barzilay, and Tommi Jaakkola. Diffdock: Diffusion
steps, twists, and turns for molecular docking. arXiv preprint arXiv:2210.01776, 2022.
[27] Fanmeng Wang, Wentao Guo, Qi Ou, Hongshuai Wang, Haitao Lin, Hongteng Xu, and Zhifeng Gao.
Polyconf: Unlocking polymer conformation generation through hierarchical generative models. arXiv
preprint arXiv:2504.08859, 2025.
[28] Mohammad Atif Faiz Afzal, Andrea R Browning, Alexander Goldberg, Mathew D Halls, Jacob L Gavartin,
Tsuguo Morisato, Thomas F Hughes, David J Giesen, and Joseph E Goose. High-throughput molecular
dynamics simulations and validation of thermophysical properties of polymers for various applications.
ACS Applied Polymer Materials, 3(2):620–630, 2020.
[29] Mathilde Orselly, Julien Devemy, Agathe Bouvet-Marchand, Alain Dequidt, Cédric Loubat, and Patrice
Malfreyt. Molecular simulations of thermomechanical properties of epoxy-amine resins. ACS omega, 7
(34):30040–30050, 2022.
[30] Chaitanya K Joshi, Xiang Fu, Yi-Lun Liao, Vahe Gharakhanyan, Benjamin Kurt Miller, Anuroop Sriram,
and Zachary W Ulissi. All-atom diffusion transformers: Unified generative modelling of molecules and
materials. arXiv preprint arXiv:2503.03965, 2025.
[31] Simon Axelrod and Rafael Gomez-Bombarelli. Geom, energy-annotated molecular conformations for
property prediction and molecular generation. Scientific Data, 9(1):185, 2022.
[32] Shyue Ping Ong, William Davidson Richards, Anubhav Jain, Geoffroy Hautier, Michael Kocher, Shreyas
Cholia, Dan Gunter, Vincent L Chevrier, Kristin A Persson, and Gerbrand Ceder. Python materials
genomics (pymatgen): A robust, open-source python library for materials analysis. Computational
Materials Science, 68:314–319, 2013.
[33] Bowen Jing, Gabriele Corso, Jeffrey Chang, Regina Barzilay, and Tommi Jaakkola. Torsional diffusion for
molecular conformer generation. Advances in neural information processing systems, 35:24240–24253,
2022.
[34] Peter Battaglia, Razvan Pascanu, Matthew Lai, Danilo Jimenez Rezende, et al. Interaction networks for
learning about objects, relations and physics. Advances in neural information processing systems, 29,
2016.
[35] Vijay Prakash Dwivedi, Anh Tuan Luu, Thomas Laurent, Yoshua Bengio, and Xavier Bresson. Graph
neural networks with learnable structural and positional representations. arXiv preprint arXiv:2110.07875,
2021.
[36] Vijay Prakash Dwivedi, Chaitanya K Joshi, Anh Tuan Luu, Thomas Laurent, Yoshua Bengio, and Xavier
Bresson. Benchmarking graph neural networks. Journal of Machine Learning Research, 24(43):1–48,
2023.
[37] Yuyang Wang, Ahmed A. A. Elhag, Navdeep Jaitly, Joshua M. Susskind, and Miguel Angel Bautista.
Swallowing the bitter pill: Simplified scalable conformer generation. In International Conference on
Machine Learning, 2023. URL https://api.semanticscholar.org/CorpusID:265506007.
[38] Erxue Min, Runfa Chen, Yatao Bian, Tingyang Xu, Kangfei Zhao, Wenbing Huang, Peilin Zhao, Junzhou
Huang, Sophia Ananiadou, and Yu Rong. Transformer for graphs: An overview from architecture
perspective. arXiv preprint arXiv:2202.08455, 2022.
[39] Valerio Mariani, Marco Biasini, Alessandro Barbato, and Torsten Schwede. lddt: a local superposition-free
score for comparing protein structures and models using distance difference tests. Bioinformatics, 29(21):
2722–2728, 2013.
14

[40] Ruiqi Gao, Emiel Hoogeboom, Jonathan Heek, Valentin De Bortoli, Kevin P. Murphy, and Tim Salimans.
Diffusion meets flow matching: Two sides of the same coin. 2024. URL https://diffusionflow.
github.io/.
[41] Hannes Stärk, Bowen Jing, Regina Barzilay, and Tommi Jaakkola. Harmonic self-conditioned flow
matching for multi-ligand docking and binding site design. arXiv preprint arXiv:2310.05764, 2023.
15
