Polymers for Extreme Conditions Designed Using
Syntax-Directed Variational Autoencoders
Rohit Batra,∗,†,‡ Hanjun Dai,¶ Tran Doan Huan,† Lihua Chen,† Chiho Kim,† Will
R. Gutekunst,§ Le Song,¶ and Rampi Ramprasad†
†School of Materials Science & Engineering, Georgia Institute of Technology, Atlanta, GA,
USA
‡Center for Nanoscale Materials, Argonne National Laboratory, Lemont, Illinois 60439,
United States
¶Computational Science & Engineering, Georgia Institute of Technology, Atlanta, GA,
USA
§School of Chemistry & Biochemistry, Georgia Institute of Technology, Atlanta, GA, USA
E-mail: rohitbatra1989@gmail.com
1
arXiv:2011.02551v1  [cond-mat.soft]  4 Nov 2020

Abstract
The design/discovery of new materials is highly non-trivial owing to the near-inﬁnite
possibilities of material candidates, and multiple required property/performance ob-
jectives. Thus, machine learning tools are now commonly employed to virtually screen
material candidates with desired properties by learning a theoretical mapping from
material-to-property space, referred to as the forward problem. However, this approach
is ineﬃcient, and severely constrained by the candidates that human imagination can
conceive. Thus, in this work on polymers, we tackle the materials discovery challenge
by solving the inverse problem: directly generating candidates that satisfy desired
property/performance objectives. We utilize syntax-directed variational autoencoders
(VAE) in tandem with Gaussian process regression (GPR) models to discover polymers
expected to be robust under three extreme conditions: (1) high temperatures, (2) high
electric ﬁeld, and (3) high temperature and high electric ﬁeld, useful for critical struc-
tural, electrical and energy storage applications. This approach to learn from (and
augment) human ingenuity is general, and can be extended to discover polymers with
other targeted properties and performance measures.
2

Introduction
A range of materials science problems are now being tackled using machine learning (ML),
including discovery of materials,1–3 revelation of hidden structure-property relations,4–6 rec-
ommendations on plausible materials or chemical synthesis pathways,7 and design of auto-
mated experiments.8 Arguably, the most direct way ML has inﬂuenced materials science is by
allowing virtual screening of thousands or millions of new materials with desired functionali-
ties,9,10 which is far beyond the current capabilities of commonly employed high-throughput
simulation or empirical techniques This paradigm shift has resulted in the discovery of super-
hard ceramics,11 metallic glasses,12 superconducting alloys,13 photovoltaics,14,15 redox ﬂow
batteries,16 among others, and continues to revolutionize various aspects of materials and
chemical sciences.17–20
The materials discovery process has, however, been mostly dominated by ML techniques
that attempt to solve the forward problem: “given a material, what is its property?” Un-
der this, starting from a dataset of materials and their corresponding properties, supervised
learning models are trained, using which property predictions for a large pool of plausible
materials are made and candidates with desirable properties are down-selected—to be later
veriﬁed by experiments. Cost-eﬀective techniques, such as Bayesian optimization21 and ac-
tive learning,22 are often utilized to search over relatively larger chemical space. Nonetheless,
these property-prediction approaches are restricted to (and implicitly biased towards) the
initial pool of materials considered, typically falling well within the purview of human imagi-
nation. This is a major limitation considering the near inﬁnite space oﬀered by materials—a
realistic estimate being placed around 10100, which is further compounded if one considers
complications that arise due to the hierarchy of scale, stretching from sub-nanometer to
microscopic and mesoscopic.23
Ideally, the problem of materials discovery is of inverse type: starting with a set of
desired properties, the aim is to search for materials that display those functionalities. In
this regard, two distinct schemes have recently been advanced. On the one hand, global
3

search strategies such as genetic algorithm,24 evolutionary searches, etc.15 tackle this inverse
problem by iteratively mutating/mixing material candidates until the target properties are
met (or a cost function is minimized); on the other hand, deep generative ML models provide
a more straightforward solution by learning an inverse functional mapping from a latent to
the materials space. Although both these approaches allow us to go beyond the constraints
of human imagination, the latter additionally learns inherent chemical trends present in the
materials data, and allow materials design by interpolating between known suitable materials
or searching within the vicinity of a known best material.
Generative models, such as variational autoencoder (VAE)25–29 and generative adversar-
ial network (GAN)30–32, have been recently used to design drug-like molecules,33,34 or even
polymers35 and periodic solids36. For instance, G´omez-Bombarelli et al.25 represented the
chemical structure of molecules using the SMILES (or simpliﬁed molecular-input line-entry
system) language, where the encoder part of the VAE learns to project the molecular SMILES
onto the latent space, while the decoder unit reconstructs the molecular SMILES given its
encoded latent representation. However, a key challenge in developing such a generative
model for molecules (or for materials, in general) is to learn the mapping between a continu-
ous latent space, and a discrete chemical structure space, enabled by the syntax or grammar
of the SMILES language and the semantics associated with the chemistry of molecules (or
materials). The absence of explicit syntax and semantics in the VAE model allows unnec-
essary ﬂexibility in representing SMILES, and thus requires more training data to learn the
diﬀerent chemical rules underlying chemical structures (and the SMILES language). This
can also results in poor quality of the learned latent space and a high occurrence of invalid
SMILES upon decoding, making the process of molecular discovery ineﬃcient. A fundamen-
tal improvement was achieved when Kusner et al.26 successfully incorporated the structure
or syntax of SMILES language using the ideas of context-free-grammar. They used grammar
associated with the SMILES language to convert molecular SMILES to parse trees, one-hot
representation of which were then used to train the VAE models. The ﬁnal missing piece
4

of incorporating semantics (e.g., respecting elemental valency) was recently achieved by Dai
et al.27 through the concept of stochastic lazy attributes, with the overall model termed as
syntax-directed VAE. Inclusion of both syntax and semantics were shown to drastically im-
prove the performance of the VAE by learning a more meaningful latent representation, but
more importantly, it allowed decoding of—syntactically and semantically—valid molecular
SMILES at a signiﬁcantly higher rate, making feasible the use of generative models for ma-
terials discovery. Recently, a very powerful and general approach, titled SELFIES, has been
shown to outperform above-mentioned methods by incorporating both syntactic and seman-
tic constraints through ‘derivation rules’ table.34 However, extension of this method for the
case of polymers, requiring special constraints, such as presence of chain ends with matching
bond type, remains to be established. The concepts of syntax and semantics are not limited
to materials science, and ﬁnd applications in other areas, such as symbolic expressions37 and
programming languages.38
In this work, we go beyond molecular design and develop polymer-speciﬁc syntax-directed
VAE to discover polymers with extreme thermal and electrical stability. Although VAE has
been used for polymer discovery in previous works, they are either limited by the explored
chemical space due to the involved grammar being restricted to a pre-determined set of
chemical fragments,35 or rely on generation of large molecules as proxy to polymers.39,40
In contrast, this work on polymer generation uses VAE that incorporates both syntax as
well as semantics constraints. To achieve this, crucial modiﬁcations were introduced in the
SMILES grammar, in addition to inclusion of polymer-speciﬁc semantics (e.g., 2 chain ends).
Thus, the decoding process incorporates polymer syntax and semantics using context-free-
grammar parse trees and stochastic lazy attributes to ensure decoded SMILES represent
plausible polymers. Another critical challenge to train a polymer VAE, as opposed to other
studies on molecular VAE, is the avilability of large amounts of training examples (in the
order of hundred thousands). The polymer community is particularly known to suﬀer from
data sparsity problems. For instance, to-date the total number of chemically diverse polymers
5

synthesized is roughly ∼12,000, which is not enough to learn a good-performing VAE model;
in contrast, datasets consiting of over 250,000 moleucles are avilable. Here, we resolve this
issue using retro-synthetic ideas to generate a representative hypothetical dataset of ∼250,000
polymers, constructed from a few thousand molecular ‘building blocks’ or fragments derived
from ∼12,000 empirically synthesized polymers obtained from the literature.
To demonstrate the preeminence of the current approach for polymer design, we use
it to discover several hundred polymer candidates that are expected to perform well, and
be stable, under 3 extreme conditions: (1) high temperatures, (2) high electric ﬁeld, and
(3) high temperature and high electric ﬁeld. We make the further assumptions that high
temperature and high electric ﬁeld behaviors may be related to the polymer glass transition
temperature (Tg) and bandgap (Eg), respectively. In particular, we set our property goals
to be (1) Tg > 600 K, (2) Eg > 6.5 eV, and (3) Tg > 500 K and Eg > 4 eV, pertaining
to the three types of extreme conditions we consider here.
While high Tg polymers are
desired for their mechanical robustness at elevated temperatures,41–44 polymers with high
Eg oﬀer large range of electrical stability at low dielectric loss, and are useful for high-
energy capacitor dielectrics.45,46 The last design goal, namely, high temperature and high
electric ﬁeld stability, is especially important for high energy density dielectrics that are
both thermally stable and display high electrical breakdown strength. The occurrence of
inverse-relation between the Tg and Eg of polymers makes the last goal most diﬃcult to
achieve from a materials discovery perspective.
Figure 1 captures the overall strategy used here for polymers design. First, an unsuper-
vised learning task is performed to train the VAE. Critical aspects of this process include the
conversion of polymer SMILES to and from one-hot-encoded parse trees, and incorporation
of grammar and semantics directly into the decoding step. The latter regulates the probabil-
ity space such that only cases with valid SMILES have non-zero probability of generation. It
should be noted that the probabilistic formulation of the latent variable in the autoencoder
introduces stochasticity in the encoding and the decoding process, resulting in a distribu-
6

GPR 
model for Tg
GPR 
model for Eg
Encoder
Decoder
Latent space
(Z)
Polymer VAE
One-hot-encoded
parse tree
(X)
Re-constructed
parse tree
(X)
Unsupervised
learning
Supervised
learning
Decoded new
polymer SMILES
[*]CC(C)C[*]
[*]C[*]CC
[*]C[*]O(C)C
[*]CO(C)[*]C
Hypothetical
Polymer
SMILES
(~250,000)
(a)
(b)
Latent space (Z)
Latent space (Z)
SMILES
Tg
Eg
SMILES
Encoder
~900 polymers
with Eg
~5,000 polymers
with Tg
One selected point in
the latent space (Z)
Decoder
[*]CC(C)C[*]
[*]C[*]CC
[*]C[*]O(C)C
Encoder
Design via 
Generation
(c)
Property
prediction & filtering
New polymers with
target properties
Search target neighborhoods 
in latent space
Grammar and semantics
VAE cost function
Re-constructed
SMILES
Figure 1: Overall strategy to design polymers with targeted properties by solving the inverse
problem of properties-to-materials space. (a) First, a variational autoencoder is used to map
polymer SMILES to and from a continuous latent space. (b) Polymers with known properties
(Tg and Eg here) are then encoded (or ‘ﬁngerprinted’ in the latent space) using the encoder.
A supervised learning technique (GPR here) is then used to map these ﬁngerprints to the
diﬀerent polymer properties, resulting in ML property models. (c) Finally, in the design
stage, known polymers with desirable properties are ﬁrst encoded to ﬁnd the region of
interest in the latent space. Using ML property prediction models, those latent points are
sampled that satisfy a given design goal.
The decoder is utilized next to construct the
corresponding polymer SMILES, which go through a subsequent round of encoding and ML
prediction to ensure that the decoded polymers meet the design goals.
tion of polymer SMILES associated with a particular latent vector and vice-versa. Next,
in the supervised learning stage, polymers with known properties — Eg and Tg here—are
ﬁrst encoded in their latent representation, using which Gaussian process regression (GPR)
models are trained for property prediction (c.f. Figure 1). Chemically meaningful latent
space learned by the VAE helps build accurate GPR models for property predictions. Fi-
nally, to design new polymers with a given set of target properties, a simple enumeration
7

followed by a generative interpolation approach is applied. Under this, known (or hypothet-
ical) polymers that satisfy the given design criteria are initially encoded to ﬁnd regions in
the latent space where desirable polymers are expected to be present. Linear interpolations
within this desired regions of the latent space are then used to select latent points for which
GPR property predictions meet the desired goals. The polymer SMILES associated with
such selected latent vectors are decoded, followed by another round of encoding and GPR
property predictions to ascertain that the designed polymer indeed satisﬁes the design ob-
jectives. The full design process is illustrated under the heading of “Design via Generation”
in Figure 1.
Finally, we note that the presented scheme is general, and could be used to design poly-
mers with any set of property targets (as long as predictors for the desired set of properties
are available). By establishing an inverse mapping from latent representation to polymer
SMILES, it overcomes the limitations of the property-prediction (or forward problem based)
approaches that screen polymers from a predetermined dataset and suﬀers from selection
bias. Moving forward, we expect this scheme to be further reﬁned using the concepts of
transfer learning, multi-task learning and semi-supervised learning.
Results and Discussion
Polymer Variational Autoencoder
As stated earlier, the VAE is a type of generative model that learn to encode or decode a
sequence of inputs to and from a continuous latent space. This is achieved by using deep
neural networks (feed-forward, convolution or recurrent type) to represent the encoding and
the decoding units, with the constraint that the encoder lowers the dimensionality of (or
compresses) the input data, while the decoder performs the decompression operation to
reconstruct the input sequence (see Figure 1(a)). As an outcome of this data compression
and expansion exercise, the VAE is expected to learn essential features of the data—polymer
8

chemistry in our case. Here, we train the VAE to map the sequence of polymer SMILES
to and from a continuous latent representation, allowing us to search this latent space for
polymers with desired properties. Notably, VAE is an unsupervised learning method that
requires just the polymer SMILES for training, without any associated property information
(labeled data). Given the dearth of property data in materials science, this is a signiﬁcant
advantage.
Crucially, the VAE is constructed such that it incorporates both the syntax of the SMILES
language and the semantics of the polymer chemistry. This is achieved using context-free-
grammar parse trees and stochastic lazy attributes, details of which can be found in the
section Methods. In particular, we modiﬁed the SMILES grammar and incorporated new
attributes to ensure that the generated polymers have exactly two chain ends with same
bonding type (single, double bond, etc.) Other syntax and semantics constraints that are
also applicable to molecules, such as valency of diﬀerent elements, closure of rings, etc. were
also retained (see Methods). Henceforth, we will refer to this syntax-directed VAE as just
VAE. The inclusion of grammar and semantics frees the VAE from explicitly (or spending
extra eﬀorts in) learning such rules from the training set, and allows it to wholly concentrate
on ﬁnding more important chemical trends, making the latent representation more chemically
meaningful. Further, it ensures generation (or decoding) of valid polymers at a signiﬁcantly
higher rate, making the process of polymer design computationally eﬃcient and practically
feasible. In this work, two VAE models with latent dimensions 64 and 128, respectively
termed as VAE-64 and VAE-128, were trained using a hypothetical polymer SMILES dataset
(with ∼250,000 SMILES). Details on the VAE training, including the hypothetical SMILES
dataset and the model architecture, are discussed in the section Methods.
Figure 2 captures the ability of the polymer VAE to learn a chemically meaningful la-
tent representation through just the unsupervised learning of SMILES. In panels (a) and (b),
gray colored symbols mark the latent projections of the entire hypothetical SMILES dataset,
reduced into the ﬁrst two principal components. Likewise, the polymers with known Tg and
9

Eg, respectively named as Tg and Eg datasets, are converted to their latent representations,
followed by their projection onto the same two principal components. More details on these
two property datasets, including their source and data size, can be found in the section Meth-
ods. Clear trends on the concentration of polymers with similar Tg and Eg in Figure 2(a) and
(b) suggest that the VAE has indeed learned important chemical characteristics. Moreover,
red colored symbols denoting the top 10 known polymers with highest Tg and Eg values
appear in a small region of the latent space, highlighting the area where similar polymers
with perhaps even higher Tg and Eg values can be found. The presence of these chemical
trends can be explained based on the following rationale: during training, VAE learns to
place polymers with similar SMILES in the neigboring regions of the latent space, thereby
automatically learning the chemical information present in the SMILES representation. We
contrast this observation with the previous study on molecules, where G´omez-Bombarelli et
al.25 were unable to see such clear chemical trends. Possibly, this is because their VAE model
does not respect SMILES grammar and molecular semantics, as was discussed in the recent
works.26 Lastly, in panel (c) we demonstrate how the diversity of the hypothetical SMILES
dataset increases with the increase in the number of molecular building blocks chosen to
create the polymers. While Figure 2 presents results for VAE-64, similar observations using
VAE-128 are provided in Supporting Information (SI) Figure S1.
Other metrics to measure the performance a VAE are the reconstruction accuracy and
the prior validity.
The former captures the ability of the model to reconstruct polymer
SMILES from their corresponding latent representations, a measure of the quality of the
latent space; the latter measures the probability of the decoder to generate valid SMILES
when sampling from the prior latent space and quantiﬁes the computational eﬃciency of
the decoding process. Considering the probabilistic nature of the encoder and the decoder,
the reconstruction accuracy was computed by encoding each polymer 10 times, followed
by decoding 100 times.
This results in 1000 decoded SMILES for each input polymer.
Two types of reconstruction accuracy were deﬁned: 1) strict, when the most frequent of
10

Figure 2: Learned latent space of the hypothetical SMILES dataset as projected onto the
ﬁrst two principal components. Observed trends in the (a) empirical Tg and the (b) DFT
computed Eg values when the known polymer datasets are encoded into the same latent
space, with highest 10 property value polymers clustered in a limited region (red color
symbols). (c) Increase in the polymer diversity with increasing ‘nfrag’ or number of molecular
building blocks (see Methods) as reﬂected by the area spanned in the latent space.
these 1000 decodings were same as the input polymer, and 2) loose, when at least one of
the 1000 decodings were same as the input polymer. The prior validity was computed by
sampling 1000 latent points from the prior distribution p(z) = N(0, I), decoding each of
these points 500 times, and ﬁnding the overall percentage of valid SMILES generated. Good
performance for the average reconstruction accuracy for the Tg and the Eg datasets, and the
percentage prior validity for the case of VAE-64 and VAE-128 can be seen in Table 1. We
note that both Tg and Eg datasets were not included during the VAE training, and constitute
unseen ‘new’ polymer cases. While the reconstruction accuracy of VAE-128 is better than
VAE-64, perhaps owing to larger latent dimensionality or capacity to retain information, its
performance is slightly worse in terms of prior validity. A fair comparison between the VAE
results presented here is not possible with the past works on molecules owing to the diﬀerent
dataset types and variations in chemical diversity. However, we note that similar level of
performance was seen in the past for the case of molecules; reconstruction accuracy and prior
validity were respectively reported to be 44.6 and 0.7 without incorporating grammar and
semantics,25 53.7 and 7.2 with grammar only,26 and 76.2 and 43.5 with both grammar and
semantics.27
11

Table 1: Performance of the polymer VAE as a function of latent dimensions for the Tg
and Eg datasets. See text for the details on the deﬁnitions of two types of reconstruction
accuracy, strict and loose (in brackets), and prior validity. R2 coeﬃcient and RMSE on the
test set (20 % of dataset) for the two ML (GPR) models are also provided.
Model
Prior validity (%)
Reconstruction (%)
ML R2 (RMSE)
Tg (K)
Eg (eV)
Tg (K)
Eg (eV)
VAE-64
27
51 (75)
53 (86)
0.76 (51.63)
0.50 (1.04)
VAE-128
13
57 (78)
67 (89)
0.79 (48.32)
0.53 (1.03)
Having established the validity of the latent space learned by polymer VAE, we next
build GPR models using the Tg and Eg datasets. For this, the polymer latent representa-
tions obtained from the VAE model were mapped to their respective property values (see
Methods). The learning curves for the two properties using both the VAE-64 and VAE-128
latent representations are provided in Figure 3(a). In all cases, reasonable error trends with
the test error decreasing with increasing training set size can be seen. Provided Tg dataset
is estimated to have a noise of around 30 K, reaching test errors around 50 K is quite re-
spectable. The performance of Eg models, although acceptable, is comparatively worse. This
could be because of the larger inherent noise present in the theoretically computed Eg values
of polymers, especially with the assumption of treating them as single chains (see details
on source of Eg dataset in Methods section). In corroboration with the results obtained for
the reconstruction accuracy, the performance of VAE-128 GPR models is visibly better than
VAE-64 for both the property datasets. Example parity plots illustrating the performance
of the GPR property prediction models, using VAE-128 latent representations, are shown
in Figure 3(b). Two quantitative error measures, i.e., root mean square error and correla-
tion coeﬃcient, averaged over 10 statistical runs, are also provided in Table 1 for both the
datasets. Once again, we note that the good level of accuracy reached by the GPR models
is a direct indicator of the high quality of latent representation learned by the VAE.
12

20
40
60
80
% Training set
30
35
40
45
50
55
60
65
RMSE in Tg prediction (K)
(a)
VAE-64, Test
VAE-64, Train
VAE-128, Test
VAE-128, Train
20
40
60
80
% Training set
0.8
0.9
1.0
1.1
RMSE in Eg prediction (eV)
200
400
600
800
Exp. Tg (K)
200
400
600
800
Tg prediction (K)
latent dim: 128
RMSE (test): 46.32 K
R2 (test): 0.81
(b)
Train
Test
0.0
2.5
5.0
7.5
10.0
DFT Eg (eV)
0
2
4
6
8
10
Eg prediction (eV)
latent dim: 128
RMSE (test): 0.84 eV
R2 (test): 0.63
Figure 3: (a) Learning curves for the GPR models built using the Tg and Eg datasets. The
polymers were ﬁrst encoded using VAE, which was then mapped to their corresponding Tg
or Eg property values. (b) Example parity plots demonstrating the performance of the GPR
Tg and Eg models built using VAE-128 latent representation.
Polymer Design
As example problems, we choose to design three classes of polymers with the following prop-
erty objectives: (1) Tg > 600 K, (2) Eg > 6.5 eV and (3) Tg > 500 K and Eg > 4 eV. Polymers
with these functionalities are desirable for various dielectric applications; high Tg polymers
provide high mechanical strength over larger temperature window,44 high Eg polymers in-
trinsically have low dielectric loss and high enough electrical breakdown strength,47 and high
Tg and Eg polymers are expected to be great candidates for high energy density capacitor
applications, particularly, at higher temperatures. While at low temperatures bandgap has
been found to correlate well with the breakdown strength of polymers,47 at high tempera-
13

tures other factors, such as chain-packing or defects may become more relevant. Thus, high
Eg as a criterion for design of high breakdown strength polymers is only approximate, and
can be replaced with more accessible or correlated properties. The diﬃculty level of these
three design goals becomes apparent from the Tg vs Eg plot in Figure 4(a), wherein all the
303 known polymers common to both the property datasets are drawn. The number of
polymers known to satisfy the aforementioned 3 design goals, i.e., high Tg, high Eg, and high
Tg and Eg are 9, 59 and 17, respectively. Further, an inverse relation between the Tg and Eg
illustrates the diﬃculty of the last design goal. Finally, we note that our aim here is to ﬁnd
chemically diverse polymers that satisfy these design goals rather than ﬁnding polymers that
maximize/minimize a particular property. This is relevant from an application standpoint
because for a successful dielectric, a polymer must satisfy a collection of properties, including
high charge transport barrier, high breakdown strength, low dielectric loss, etc., rather than
display one best property. By imposing many such simple design criteria the hope is that
several polymer candidates can be proposed in extensions to this work, which can be later
down-selected by imposing other screening criteria based on a target application.
Design via Enumeration
As part of the ﬁrst design problem, we simply make property predictions for the entire
hypothetical SMILES dataset of nearly 250,000 polymers. The Tg and Eg GPR models were
used to make these predictions based on the VAE encoded latent representations. The inverse
relation between the Tg and Eg as observed for the case of known polymers in Figure 4(a),
is also preserved when using the GPR property predictions for the hypothetical polymer
dataset in Figure 4(b) and (c). This, along with test set accuracy reached by the GPR
models, provides some conﬁdence in the property predictions made for the hypothetical
polymer dataset using the present scheme. There are, however, some polymers with high
uncertainty in the GPR predictions, as captured by the marker color codings in panels (b)
and (c). Nonetheless, the yellow colored high uncertainty regions are diﬀerent from those
14

Figure 4: Comparison of the trend between Tg and Eg for (a) known polymers, and for
hypothetical polymers as predicted using GPR models based on latent representations of
(b)VAE-64 and (c)VAE-128.
In (b) and (c), the marker color represent the sum of the
uncertainties in GPR Tg and Eg predictions, each normalized by its range. The magenta,
red and blue colored lines are guide to the three design criteria high Eg, high Tg, and high Eg
and Tg, respectively, with N(Eg), N(Tg) and N(Eg, Tg) highlighting the number of polymers
found to satisfy the three design criteria (in same order) in diﬀerent datasets.
where the three design criteria are met. The number of hypothetical polymers that satisfy
the three design criteria are also included in panels (b) and (c), which is signiﬁcantly larger
than that in the original Tg and Eg datasets.
The complete list of these new polymer
candidates predicted to have the desired functionalities, and designed through solving the
forward problem is provided in SI.
Design via Inversion
The chemical trends captured by the latent representation, illustrated in Figure 2, suggest
that polymers with similar properties occupy closer neighborhood in the latent space. Thus,
if a few polymers with the desired properties are already known, a search in their latent
neighborhood could reveal many more suitable polymer candidates.
The GPR property
prediction models could be used to advance this search. Once the latent points satisfying
the given design criteria are identiﬁed, the inverse mapping from the latent representation
to the polymer, made available through the VAE decoder, can be used to ﬁnd the associated
polymer candidate. We note that owing to the stochastic nature of the decoding process,
15

there is some ambiguity with the exact polymer represented by the selected latent point.
Thus, to address this issue, a second round of encoding for all the decoded polymer candidates
is performed and the associated GPR property predictions are made to check if the design
criteria are indeed met. Polymers satisfying the design criteria are retained.
Following the above-mentioned design strategy, for a particular design goal, the top
250 polymer candidates identiﬁed as part of the earlier enumeration scheme were selected.
Linear interpolations in the latent space for all combinations of selected 250 polymers were
performed, and latent points whose associated GPR predictions meet the design criteria
were selected. Owing to computational cost, decoding for only top 10,000 latent points—
with the highest GPR property prediction values—was done 100 times. Only those decoded
candidates were retained that satisfy the design criteria after another round of encoding, as
discussed above and illustrated in Figure 1(c). This procedure was repeated for all three
design criteria. The complete list of polymer candidates generated using this approach are
provided in SI, while some representative cases are presented in Figure 5. Care was taken
to eliminate duplicate candidates with the Eg, Tg and the hypothetical SMILES datasets.
A few observations can be made from the results presented in Figure 5. First, from a
chemical standpoint the proposed polymer candidates appear to be rational; predominance
of conjugated systems is reﬂective of polymers with high Tg, presence of saturated C-F
bonds suggest high Eg, and a balance between saturated rings and C bonded with highly
electronegative F and O species is expected to have both high Tg and Eg. Though synthesis of
these candidates, and their subsequent characterization and measurement would be required
to conﬁrm their property predictions. Nonetheless, for the case Eg predictions we provide
preliminary validation using DFT computations. We selected 30 new polymers (10 from
each of the design goals) proposed using VAE design scheme, and constructed single chain
polymer systems on which DFT calculations were performed, consistent with generation of
the Eg training dataset. The results are similar to those observed for test set in Figure 3
and are provided in SI Figure S2.
16

#
Example New Polymers
Enumeration
Generation
High Tg (in K)
1
686.77(53.78)
737.76 (57.30)
2
661.90(54.18)
708.59(70.13)
3
649.04(52.20)
707.83(53.64)
High Eg (in eV)
1
8.23 (1.04)
8.61 (1.10)
2
7.96 (1.02)
8.56 (1.06)
3
7.60 (1.02)
8.46 (1.01)
High Tg (in K), Eg (in eV)
1
517.44 (81.82), 4.97 (1.67)
509.53 (54.01), 6.32 (1.11)
2
501.54 (65.21), 5.49 (1.34)
528.65(56.11), 6.05 (1.19)
3
548.52 (56.93), 4.61 (1.30)
506.89 (52.82), 6.2 (1.11)
Figure 5: Example polymers designed in this work, along with their GPR Tg and Eg esti-
mates and uncertainties (in brackets). The symbol ‘*’ represents the polymer chain ends.
17

Second, following the simple strategy of search in the latent space neighborhood, the gen-
erative or inverse scheme is indeed able to identify several cases which have superior proper-
ties (higher Tg and/or Eg) than that obtained through enumeration or property-prediction
(forward problem) approach (also see SI). This clearly highlights the advantage of the design
strategy presented here (which allows us to go beyond the constraints of human imagination)
and the motivation to solve the inverse problem. In contrast to the 17 known polymers, al-
most 300 new potential candidates have been designed (list provided in SI) with the goal
of exhibiting high Tg and Eg. Further, this scheme has the potential to ﬁnd many more
polymers satisfying these criteria. Lastly, associated with each distinct design goal, poly-
mers with very diﬀerent chemistry are generated by the decoder. An analysis of the common
chemical fragments present in the VAE generated polymers for the three target properties is
provided in SI. It not only shows the distinct chemistry necessary to satisfy each of the three
conditions, but also reveals new trends in form of chemical fragments promoting these prop-
erties. For instance, saturated 4,5 member rings, bridged rings, oxolane groups, and C atoms
bonded to a limited number of electronegative F, Cl and O groups had higher occurrence rate
for polymers predicted to have high Tg and Eg. Furthermore, since the VAE generated poly-
mers contain ‘new’ chemical fragments as opposed to those present in the training data, it
demonstrates the ability of our approach to explore extremely huge chemical space, without
being restricted to a pre-determined set of chemical fragments. Overall, the VAE approach
resulted in generation of resonable polymers, with distinct chemistry for diﬀerent conditions,
involving generation of ‘new’ chemical fragments and with superior property predictions. We
expect the inclusion of grammar and semantics in the VAE as the major cause that enabled
learning of a meaningful latent space, making it a powerful polymer-discovery tool.
Many avenues remain for improving the design strategy adopted here. The set of polymer
semantics included is not complete. Incorporating more semantics is expected to enhance
the performance of the entire design process. The model provides no information regarding
the synthesizability of the generated polymers; this point is particularly relevant for high
18

Tg polymers that are diﬃcult to synthesize. Moreover, rather than individually conduct-
ing the unsupervised (autoencoder) and the supervised (GPR) training, joint training can
be performed for all the SMILES as well as the property datasets. Such semi-supervised
learning has been shown to improve the performance of machine learning models. Eﬀorts
to incorporate other aspects of polymer structure, such as crosslinking, chain length, disper-
sity, etc. should also be made, perhaps through the use of recently developed BigSMILES
representation.48 Further, polymer search in the latent space could be potentially improved
using reinforcement learning.49
Conclusion
The space of potential materials is near-inﬁnite, making the search for materials with desir-
able properties intractable. With the introduction of machine learning, the design of new
materials with desirable properties has accelerated and/or improved. However, still most of
the methods rely on solving the forward problem, wherein materials-to-property mappings
are learned using which a predetermined list of material candidates are screened. This ap-
proach is not only limited in terms of the explored materials space, but is computationally
ineﬃcient. Here, instead we demonstrate a strategy that solves the inverse problem: starting
from the properties required, desirable materials candidates are generated. As an example,
we design 3 classes of polymers applicable for thermal extremes, electrical extremes, and
thermal and electrical extremes.
Our strategy is based on the use of variational autoencoders to encode and decode poly-
mers to and from a continuous latent space, allowing one to search this space for new poly-
mers with desirable properties. The autoencoder is trained to operate using the SMILES
representation of the polymers. Crucially, the learning ability of the autoencoder is enhanced
by directly incorporating the SMILES grammar and polymer semantics using context-free-
grammar parse trees and stochastic lazy attributes. This allows to construct a more meaning-
19

ful latent representation for polymers, and improves the eﬃciency of the decoder to generate
valid polymers. Next, supervised learning GPR models were built for two property datasets,
i.e., Tg and Eg, using the polymer latent representations.
To design polymers with desired Tg and Eg properties, enumeration and generative
schemes were adopted. In the former case, GPR property predictions for a hypothetical
(but realistic) polymer dataset were made to screen polymers that meet the design criteria,
parallel to solving the forward problem. These selected polymer candidates helped drive the
latter case by identifying interesting latent neighborhoods, which were searched using GPR
property prediction models to ﬁnd latent points that correspond to the required proper-
ties. The decoder was then used to ﬁnd the associated polymers. More importantly, among
the two approaches, the generative design approach (which solves the inverse problem) was
found to discover polymer candidates with superior properties, with a much lower computa-
tional budget. Using both these schemes, we proposed several hundred potential polymers
for diﬀerent dielectric applications, although we note that the proposed design scheme is
quite general and can be applied to discover polymers with any set of desired functionalities.
Further, we expect the advantage of the generative design to become more apparent when
it is used to perform targeted search in the latent space for polymers with more complex set
of properties.
Methods
Unsupervised Learning: Polymer Variational Autoencoder
A variational autoencoder50 is a framework to learn the generative model with latent vari-
ables for the input dataset X = [x1, x2, ..., xN]. The generative process of each sample x is
performed by ﬁrst sampling a latent vector z from prior p(z) (typically a normal Gaussian
distribution, denoted as N(0, I)), and then sample from conditional distribution pθ(x|z)
(known as ‘decoder’). The overall goal is to maximize the marginal likelihood p(x), but due
20

to the intractability of the direct optimization, a variational posterior pφ(z|x) (known as
‘encoder’) is introduced to optimize the evidence lower bound (ELBO):
L(φ, θ; x) =
log
R
z pθ(x|z)p(z)
≥Eqφ(z|x)

log pθ(x|z) + log p(z) −log qφ(z|x)

(1)
To make it easy to sample or calculate the probability from qφ(z|x), typically a parametric
distribution is assumed (in this work, we assume a multivariate gaussian with diagonal
covariance matrix).
By limiting the dimensionality of z, the encoder is forced to learn
meaningful representations in latent space. With a carefully designed decoder, the decoding
probability mass will be reshaped towards desired target region. Next, we introduce two
important concepts of context-free-grammars and stochastically lazy attributes which enforce
the decoder to (re)construct syntactically and semantically valid polymer SMILES.
Incorporating Grammar or Syntax
Given a language and its context-free-grammar (CFG), a sentence in this language (e.g. a
SMILES string) can be transformed to a parse tree.51 While this concept is common for
processing sentences in natural or programming languages, here we utilize it to transform
polymer SMILES into its syntactic tree structure, which will be used as an input/output
to the VAE. Formally, a CFG is deﬁned as G = (V, Σ, R, S), where V is a ﬁnite set of
non-terminal symbols; Σ is a ﬁnite set of terminal symbols, distinct from V; R is a ﬁnite
set of production rules; and S ∈V is a distinct non-terminal start symbol.
Each pro-
duction rule r ∈R is denoted as r = α →β for α ∈V is a nonterminal symbol, and
β = u1u2...u|β| ∈(V ∪Σ)∗is a sequence of terminal and/or nonterminal symbols. Thus, for
a string in a language—i.e. a sequence of terminals in Σ—the grammar G converts it into
a syntactic tree, consisting of branching of non-terminal symbols in V , produced by recur-
sively applying rules in R to leaf nodes, until all leaf nodes are terminal symbols in Σ. For
21

example, a parse tree for a polyketone, with SMILES [*]CC(=O)[*], is shown in Figure 6;
the ‘[*]’ symbolizes the chain ends. This was generated using the grammar G provided below:
smiles →chain | AT chain AT | AT chain
AT →ATT | ATT bond | bond ATT
ATT →‘[*]’
atom →bracket atom | aliphatic organic | aromatic organic
aliphatic organic →‘B’ | ‘C’ | ‘N’ | ‘O’ | ‘S’ | ‘P’ | ‘F’ | ‘I’ | ‘Cl’ | ‘Br’ | ‘H’
aromatic organic →‘c’ | ‘n’ | ‘o’ | ‘s’
bracket atom →‘[’ BAI ‘]’
BAI →isotope symbol BAC | symbol BAC | isotope symbol | symbol
BAC →chiral BAH | BAH | chiral
BAH →hcount charge | charge | hcount
symbol →aliphatic organic | aromatic organic
isotope →DIGIT | DIGIT DIGIT | DIGIT DIGIT DIGIT
DIGIT →‘1’ | ‘2’ | ‘3’ | ‘4’ | ‘5’ | ‘6’ | ‘7’ | ‘8’ | ‘9’
chiral →‘@’ | ‘@@’
hcount →‘H’ | ‘H’ DIGIT
charge →‘−’ | ‘−’ DIGIT | ‘+’ | ‘+’ DIGIT
bond →‘−’ | ‘=’ | ‘#’ | ‘/’ | ‘\’
ringbond →DIGIT | bond DIGIT
branched atom →atom | atom BB | atom RB | atom RB BB
RB →ringbond | ringbond RB
BB →branch | branch BB
branch →‘(’ chain ‘)’ | ‘(’ bond chain ‘)’ | ‘(’ AT ‘)’ | ‘(’ chain AT ‘)’ | ‘(’ bond chain AT ‘)’
chain →branched atom | branched atom chain | branched atom bond chain
The parse tree can be decomposed into a sequence of production rules, and can be
converted into a list of 1-hot vectors, with each dimension of the vector corresponding to a
rule or a terminal symbol in the polymer SMILES grammar. Thus, each polymer SMILES
gets converted into matrix X ∈RTxp, where p denotes the total number of production rules
and terminal symbols in the polymer grammar, and T is the number of productions applied
to parse the input SMILES. For consistent dimensions across diﬀerent SMILES, X is padded
with dummy numbers until T = Tmax. The matrix X is then used as the input to the VAE
encoder.
The VAE decoder attempts to reconstruct this matrix X or the sequence of production
rules (and thus, the polymer SMILES). To ensure syntactically valid SMILES are generated,
22

at any time during the decoding process, the decoder is only allowed to select from a subset
of valid production rules. More details on the implementation of this process can be found
here.26
SMILES
AT chain   AT 
ATT
[*]
branched_atom
chain
atom
aliphatic_organic
‘C’
ATT
[*]
branched_atom
atom   BB
aliphatic_organic
‘C’
branch
bond   chain
‘=’
branched_atom
atom
aliphatic_organic
‘O’
‘(’
‘)’
Figure 6: Syntactic tree for polymer SMILES [*]CC(=O)[*] denoting a polyketone. The tree
is generated by recursively applying production rules present in the grammar (see text for
details), until all leaf nodes contain terminal symbols.
Incorporating Semantics
The CFG implementation only guarantees production of syntactically valid SMILES. How-
ever, another crucial component for producing valid SMILES is to incorporate correct se-
mantics or chemical rules. For example, the SMILES [*]C, [*]C(≡O)C[*] and [*]c1ccccc[*]
are all syntactically correct, but semantically invalid due to absence of the second polymer
23

chain end, unrealistic triple bond with O atom and non-closure of ring bond numbered 1,
respectively.
In this work, we extend the previously proposed SD-VAE27 to polymer domain. The
main idea of SD-VAE is to use the concept of attribute grammar to regulate the generation
of the CFG tree by forcing the decoder to select from a smaller subset of semantically valid
production rules. Formally, the attribute grammar is implemented by associating certain
attribute(s) (or tags) to the non-terminal symbols of the CFG, written as ⟨v⟩.a for v ∈V .
Depending on the direction of information ﬂow, attributes can either be inherited (parent
to child nodes) or synthesized (child to parent nodes). However, these traditional concepts
of attribute grammar can only be applied once the entire CFG tree of a molecule/polymer
has been generated, making them inadequate for semantic checks. In contrast, SD-VAE
proposed a generic way to introduce the concept of ‘lazy attribute’, that allows performing
the attribute grammar check alongside the generation of the CFG tree. More details on
the implementation of SD-VAE for molecules is available in the original work.27 Here, we
extend it for the case of polymers by introducing novel polymerization semantics constraint
that guarantees the generated SMILES string has two chain ends with matched bond types.
Furthermore, the framework extensions allow it to be applicable for both molecule and
polymer discovery.
To realize the polymerization semantics, the following components are implemented in
the generic SD-VAE framework:
• Polymer inherited attribute: this attribute is computed in the parent-to-child
direction. If during polymer generation one chain end (‘[*]’) has already been generated
with a particular bond type, say single bond, it will constraint the next generated chain
end to also have the same bond type. Further, it is used to ensure exactly two chain
ends are generated.
• Polymer synthesized attribute: this attribute is computed in the child-to-parent
direction. Once the ﬁrst symbol ‘[*]’ and the corresponding bond type is generated
24

during decoding, it is used to pass this information from the respective leaf node all
the way to the root node.
• Polymer stochastic lazy attribute: this attribute is exclusively introduced in the
context of SD-VAE. It is used to memorize only the existence of ‘[*]’, while delaying the
calculation of the synthesized attribute, i.e., the bond type associated with ‘[*]’. Once
the actual ‘[*]’ is generated, its bond type will be realized, and synthesized attribute
will be used to pass this information up the tree. Later, inherited attributes will be
utilized for generation of the other matching ‘[*]’.
An example of attribute grammar for polymer tree generation is provided in SI. Besides
these polymer semantics, we also enforced semantics common to molecular systems. Thus,
overall, the following set of semantics were imposed:
• Polymer chain: there should be exactly 2 ‘[*]’ to denote the chain ends; the bond type
associated with the beginning and end [*] should also match
• Valency constraints: limit the maximum number of bonds associated with each atom
• Ringbond consistency: ringbonds should come in pairs and could overlap with each
other
• Aromatic: atom type can only be aromatic when it is part of a ring
VAE Architecture
For the encoder, we used 3-layer one-dimensional convolution neural networks (CNNs) fol-
lowed by a fully connected dense layer, output of which are used to get mean and variance of
the distribution qφ(z|x) through the reparametrization trick. To decode, 3-layer gated recur-
rent unit (GRU) based recurrent neural network (RNN) is used followed by an aﬃne layer
activated by softmax to give probabilities pθ(x|z). The VAE architecture in inspired from
the recent work on molecules,25–27 allowing us to compare our results with past works. The
25

value of Tmax was set to 512, while two VAE models with latent dimensionality of 64 and 128
were trained using Adam optimization algorithm.52 The number of training epochs were de-
termined by monitoring the model performance on a validation set of 20,000 SMILES taken
from the hypothetical SMILES dataset. The VAE code was implemented in the PyTorch
framework.
Supervised Leaning: Gaussian Process Regression (GPR)
After training the polymer VAE, we use GPR to learn polymer properties using their encoded
latent representations.
GPR uses a Bayesian framework, wherein a Gaussian process is
used to obtain the functional mapping f(z) →y based on the available training set and
the Bayesian prior, incorporated using the covariance (or kernel) function.
The square
exponential kernel, k(z, z′) = σf exp

−1
2σ2
l ||z −z′||2
+ δijσ2
n, with three hyper-parameters
σf, σl and σn, was chosen for this work. This choice of kernel is quite standard and is known
to work well for a variety of materials problems.
Training Datasets
Deep generative models, such as VAE, need larger datasets (in the order of 100,000 examples)
for the training to be eﬀective.
While such large datasets are available for the case of
molecules, we could only obtain information on ∼12,000 polymers, experimentally reported
in the literature. Thus, using this initial dataset, a strategy was devised to create a larger
hypothetical polymer SMILES dataset. The strategy is based on the use of retro-synthesis
principles to ﬁnd various polymer “building blocks”, which are then combined together to
form hypothetical polymers. Care is taken to preserve the frequency of occurrence of diﬀerent
building blocks in the hypothetical dataset, making it realistic and representative of the
initial empirically known polymers. A total of ∼250,000 hypothetical polymer SMILES were
created by combining various number of building blocks, ranging from 2-7 (see SI). Except
20,000 SMILES used as the validation set, all of the remaining hypothetical polymer SMILES
26

were used for VAE training. Model parameters with lowest validation error were selected.
GPR property prediction models were trained using empirically known Tg and theoret-
ically computed Eg datasets containing 4,997 and 963 data points, respectively. While Tg
dataset was collected from experimental reports in the literature, the Eg dataset consisted
of density functional theory (DFT) computed bandgap values of polymer single chains. It
should be noted that measuring Eg values for polymers is a non-trivial task, and the DFT
computed values can only be considered as reasonable estimates. Nonetheless, past works
suggest a good correlation between the DFT computed and the empirically measured Eg
values for a few common polymers.53
References
(1) Meredig, B.; Agrawal, A.; Kirklin, S.; Saal, J. E.; Doak, J.; Thompson, A.; Zhang, K.;
Choudhary, A.; Wolverton, C. Combinatorial screening for new materials in uncon-
strained composition space with machine learning. Phys. Rev. B 2014, 89, 094104.
(2) Pilania, G.; McClellan, K. J.; Stanek, C. R.; Uberuaga, B. P. Physics-informed machine
learning for inorganic scintillator discovery. J. Chem. Phys. 2018, 148, 241729.
(3) Chen, L.; Tran, H.; Batra, R.; Kim, C.; Ramprasad, R. Machine learning models for
the lattice thermal conductivity prediction of inorganic materials. Comput. Mater. Sci.
2019, 170, 109155.
(4) Tshitoyan, V.; Dagdelen, J.; Weston, L.; Dunn, A.; Rong, Z.; Kononova, O.; Pers-
son, K. A.; Ceder, G.; Jain, A. Unsupervised word embeddings capture latent knowledge
from materials science literature. Nature 2019, 571, 95.
(5) Sun, S.; Ouyang, R.; Zhang, B.; Zhang, T.-Y. Data-driven discovery of formulas by
symbolic regression. MRS Bull. 2019, 44, 559–564.
27

(6) Vasudevan, R. K.; Choudhary, K.; Mehta, A.; Smith, R.; Kusne, G.; Tavazza, F.;
Vlcek, L.; Ziatdinov, M.; Kalinin, S. V.; Hattrick-Simpers, J. Materials science in the
artiﬁcial intelligence age: high-throughput library generation, machine learning, and a
pathway from correlations to the underpinning physics. MRS Commun. 2019, 1–18.
(7) Kim, E.; Huang, K.; Saunders, A.; McCallum, A.; Ceder, G.; Olivetti, E. Materials
synthesis insights from scientiﬁc literature via text extraction and machine learning.
Chem. Mater. 2017, 29, 9436–9444.
(8) King, R. D.; Rowland, J.; Oliver, S. G.; Young, M.; Aubrey, W.; Byrne, E.; Liakata, M.;
Markham, M.; Pir, P.; Soldatova, L. N.; Sparkes, A.; Whelan, K. E.; Clare, A. The
automation of science. Science 2009, 324, 85–89.
(9) Kim, C.; Chandrasekaran, A.; Huan, T. D.; Das, D.; Ramprasad, R. Polymer genome:
a data-powered polymer informatics platform for property predictions. J. Phys. Chem.
C 2018, 122, 17575–17585.
(10) Xue, D.; Balachandran, P. V.; Hogden, J.; Theiler, J.; Xue, D.; Lookman, T. Acceler-
ated search for materials with targeted properties by adaptive design. Nat. Commun.
2016, 7, 11241.
(11) Mansouri Tehrani, A.; Oliynyk, A. O.; Parry, M.; Rizvi, Z.; Couper, S.; Lin, F.;
Miyagi, L.; Sparks, T. D.; Brgoch, J. Machine learning directed search for ultrain-
compressible, superhard materials. J. Am. Chem. Soc. 2018, 140, 9844–9853.
(12) Ren, F.; Ward, L.; Williams, T.; Laws, K. J.; Wolverton, C.; Hattrick-Simpers, J.;
Mehta, A. Accelerated discovery of metallic glasses through iteration of machine learn-
ing and high-throughput experiments. Sci. Adv. 2018, 4, eaaq1566.
(13) Stanev, V.; Oses, C.; Kusne, A. G.; Rodriguez, E.; Paglione, J.; Curtarolo, S.;
Takeuchi, I. Machine learning modeling of superconducting critical temperature. npj
Comput. Mater. 2018, 4, 29.
28

(14) Lopez, S. A.; Sanchez-Lengeling, B.; de Goes Soares, J.; Aspuru-Guzik, A. Design
principles and top non-fullerene acceptor candidates for organic photovoltaics. Joule
2017, 1, 857–870.
(15) Kanal, I. Y.; Owens, S. G.; Bechtel, J. S.; Hutchison, G. R. Eﬃcient computational
screening of organic polymer photovoltaics. J. Phys. Chem. Lett. 2013, 4, 1613–1623.
(16) Cheng, L.; Assary, R. S.; Qu, X.; Jain, A.; Ong, S. P.; Rajput, N. N.; Persson, K.; Cur-
tiss, L. A. Accelerating electrolyte discovery for energy storage with high-throughput
screening. J. Phys. Chem. Lett. 2015, 6, 283–291.
(17) Chandrasekaran, A.; Kamal, D.; Batra, R.; Kim, C.; Chen, L.; Ramprasad, R. Solving
the electronic structure problem with machine learning. npj Comput. Mater. 2019, 5,
22.
(18) Huan, T. D.; Batra, R.; Chapman, J.; Krishnan, S.; Chen, L.; Ramprasad, R. A uni-
versal strategy for the creation of machine learning-based atomistic force ﬁelds. npj
Comput. Mater. 2017, 3, 37.
(19) Pun, G. P.; Batra, R.; Ramprasad, R.; Mishin, Y. Physically informed artiﬁcial neural
networks for atomistic modeling of materials. Nat. Commun. 2019, 10.
(20) Huan, T. D.; Batra, R.; Chapman, J.; Kim, C.; Chandrasekaran, A.; Ramprasad, R.
Iterative-learning strategy for the development of application-speciﬁc atomistic force
ﬁelds. J. Phys. Chem. C 2019, 123, 20715–20722.
(21) Shahriari, B.; Swersky, K.; Wang, Z.; Adams, R. P.; de Freitas, N. Taking the human
out of the loop: A review of bayesian optimization. Proceedings of the IEEE 2016, 104,
148–175.
(22) Kim, C.; Chandrasekaran, A.; Jha, A.; Ramprasad, R. Active-learning and materials
29

design: the example of high glass transition temperature polymers. MRS Commun.
2019, 1–7.
(23) Walsh, A. Inorganic materials: The quest for new functionality. Nat. Chem. 2015, 7,
274.
(24) Kim, C.; Batra, R.; Chen, L.; Tran, H.; Ramprasad, R. Polymer design using genetic
algorithm and machine learning. Comput. Mater. Sci. 2021, 186, 110067.
(25) G´omez-Bombarelli, R.; Wei, J. N.; Duvenaud, D.; Hern´andez-Lobato, J. M.; S´anchez-
Lengeling, B.; Sheberla, D.; Aguilera-Iparraguirre, J.; Hirzel, T. D.; Adams, R. P.;
Aspuru-Guzik, A. Automatic chemical design using a data-driven continuous represen-
tation of molecules. ACS Cent. Sci. 2018, 4, 268–276.
(26) Kusner, M. J.; Paige, B.; Hern´andez-Lobato, J. M. Grammar variational autoencoder.
Proceedings of the 34th International Conference on Machine Learning-Volume 70.
2017; pp 1945–1954.
(27) Dai, H.; Tian, Y.; Dai, B.; Skiena, S.; Song, L. Syntax-directed variational autoencoder
for structured data. arXiv:1802.08786 2018,
(28) Jin, W.; Barzilay, R.; Jaakkola, T. Junction tree variational autoencoder for molecular
graph generation. arXiv:1802.04364 2018,
(29) Liu, Q.; Allamanis, M.; Brockschmidt, M.; Gaunt, A. Constrained graph variational
autoencoders for molecule design. Adv. Neural Inf. Process. Syst. 2018; pp 7795–7804.
(30) Guimaraes, G. L.; Sanchez-Lengeling, B.; Outeiral, C.; Farias, P. L. C.; Aspuru-
Guzik, A. Objective-reinforced generative adversarial networks (ORGAN) for sequence
generation models. arXiv:1705.10843 2017,
(31) You, J.; Liu, B.; Ying, Z.; Pande, V.; Leskovec, J. Graph convolutional policy network
30

for goal-directed molecular graph generation. Adv. Neural Inf. Process. Syst. 2018; pp
6410–6421.
(32) De Cao, N.; Kipf, T. MolGAN: An implicit generative model for small molecular graphs.
arXiv:1805.11973 2018,
(33) Kotsias, P.-C.; Ar´us-Pous, J.; Chen, H.; Engkvist, O.; Tyrchan, C.; Bjerrum, E. J.
Direct steering of de novo molecular generation with descriptor conditional recurrent
neural networks. Nat. Mach. Intell. 2020, 2, 254–265.
(34) Krenn, M.; Hase, F.; Nigam, A.; Friederich, P.; Aspuru-Guzik, A. Self-Referencing
Embedded Strings (SELFIES): A 100% robust molecular string representation. Mach.
Learn. Sci. Tech. 2020,
(35) Jørgensen, P. B.; Mesta, M.; Shil, S.; Garc´ıa Lastra, J. M.; Jacobsen, K. W.; Thyge-
sen, K. S.; Schmidt, M. N. Machine learning-based screening of complex molecules for
polymer solar cells. J. Chem. Phys. 2018, 148, 241735.
(36) Kim, B.; Lee, S.; Kim, J. Inverse design of porous materials using artiﬁcial neural
networks. Sci. Adv. 2020, 6, eaax9324.
(37) Allamanis, M.; Chanthirasegaran, P.; Kohli, P.; Sutton, C. Learning continuous se-
mantic representations of symbolic expressions. Proceedings of the 34th International
Conference on Machine Learning-Volume 70. 2017; pp 80–88.
(38) Kernighan, B. W.; Ritchie, D. M.; Ejeklint, P. The C programming language, volume
2; Prentice-Hall Englewood Cliﬀs, 1988.
(39) St. John, P. C.; Phillips, C.; Kemper, T. W.; Wilson, A. N.; Guan, Y.; Crowley, M. F.;
Nimlos, M. R.; Larsen, R. E. Message-passing neural networks for high-throughput
polymer screening. J. Chem. Phys. 2019, 150, 234111.
31

(40) Jin, W.; Barzilay, R.; Jaakkola, T. Hierarchical Generation of Molecular Graphs using
Structural Motifs. arXiv preprint arXiv:2002.03230 2020,
(41) Ho, J. S.; Greenbaum, S. G. Polymer capacitor dielectrics for high temperature appli-
cations. ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces 2018, 10, 29189–29218.
(42) Tan, D.; Zhang, L.; Chen, Q.; Irwin, P. High-temperature capacitor polymer ﬁlms. J.
Electron. Mater. 2014, 43, 4569–4575.
(43) Zhou, Y.; Li, Q.; Dang, B.; Yang, Y.; Shao, T.; Li, H.; Hu, J.; Zeng, R.; He, J.;
Wang, Q. A scalable, high-throughput, and environmentally benign approach to poly-
mer dielectrics exhibiting signiﬁcantly improved capacitive performance at high tem-
peratures. Adv. Mater. 2018, 30, 1805672.
(44) Wu, C.; Deshmukh, A. A.; Li, Z.; Chen, L.; Alamri, A.; Wang, Y.; Ramprasad, R.;
Sotzing, G. A.; Cao, Y. Flexible temperature-invariant polymer dielectrics with large
bandgap. Adv. Mater. 2020, 32, 2000499.
(45) Mannodi-Kanakkithodi, A.; Chandrasekaran, A.; Kim, C.; Huan, T. D.; Pilania, G.;
Botu, V.; Ramprasad, R. Scoping the polymer genome: A roadmap for rational polymer
dielectrics design and beyond. Mater. Today 2018, 21, 785–796.
(46) Kim, C.; Pilania, G.; Ramprasad, R. From organized high-throughput data to phe-
nomenological theory using machine learning: the example of dielectric breakdown.
Chem. Mater. 2016, 28, 1304–1311.
(47) Kamal, D.; Wang, Y.; Tran, H. D.; Chen, L.; Li, Z.; Wu, C.; Nasreen, S.; Cao, Y.;
Ramprasad, R. Computable bulk and interfacial electronic structure features as prox-
ies for dielectric breakdown of polymers. ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces 2020, PMID:
32705867.
32

(48) Lin, T.-S.; Coley, C. W.; Mochigase, H.; Beech, H. K.; Wang, W.; Wang, Z.; Woods, E.;
Craig, S. L.; Johnson, J. A.; Kalow, J. A., et al. BigSMILES: a structurally-based line
notation for describing macromolecules. ACS Cent. Sci. 2019, 5, 1523–1531.
(49) Zhou, Z.; Kearnes, S.; Li, L.; Zare, R. N.; Riley, P. Optimization of molecules via deep
reinforcement learning. Sci. Rep. 2019, 9, 1–10.
(50) Kingma, D. P.; Welling, M. Auto-encoding variational bayes. In Proceedings of the
International Conference on Learning Representations (ICLR). 2014.
(51) Hopcroft, J. E.; Motwani, R.; Ullman, J. D. Introduction to Automata theory, languages
and computation; Addison-Wesley, 2006.
(52) Kingma, D. P.; Ba, J. Adam: A method for stochastic optimization. International
Conference on Learning Representations. 2015.
(53) Chen, L.; Venkatram, S.; Kim, C.; Batra, R.; Chandrasekaran, A.; Ramprasad, R.
Electrochemical stability window of polymeric electrolytes. Chem. Mater. 2019, 31,
4598–4604.
Additional information
Acknowledgements
This work is supported by the Oﬃce of Naval Research through N0014-17-1-2656, a Multi-
University Research Initiative (MURI) grant. R.B. acknowledges the use of the Center for
Nanoscale Materials, an Oﬃce of Science user facility, and support by the U.S. Department
of Energy, Oﬃce of Science, Oﬃce of Basic Energy Sciences, under Contract No. DE-AC02-
06CH11357.
33

Supplementary Information
List of the new polymers (SMILES and VAE property predictions) designed in this work, and
additional discussion on the VAE-128 latent space, polymer bandgap validation, hypothetical
SMILES data set, chemical fragment analysis and polymer attribute grammar.
Competing interests
The authors declare no competing interests.
Keywords
variational autoencoders, polymer design, machine learning, polymer dielectrics
TOC
High Tg
High bandgap
High Tg & bandgap
Encoder
Decoder
Polymer SD-VAE
Polymer
Polymer
Polymer latent space
34
