Recent developments in the PySCF program package
Qiming Sun,1 Xing Zhang,2 Samragni Banerjee,3 Peng Bao,4 Marc Barbry,5 Nick S. Blunt,6 Nikolay A.
Bogdanov,7 George H. Booth,8 Jia Chen,9, 10 Zhi-Hao Cui,2 Janus Juul Eriksen,11 Yang Gao,12 Sheng Guo,13
Jan Hermann,14, 15 Matthew R. Hermes,16 Kevin Koh,17 Peter Koval,18 Susi Lehtola,19 Zhendong Li,20 Junzi
Liu,21 Narbe Mardirossian,22 James D. McClain,23 Mario Motta,24 Bastien Mussard,25 Hung Q. Pham,16
Artem Pulkin,26 Wirawan Purwanto,27 Paul J. Robinson,28 Enrico Ronca,29 Elvira Sayfutyarova,30 Maximilian
Scheurer,31 Henry F. Schurkus,2 James E. T. Smith,25 Chong Sun,2 Shi-Ning Sun,12 Shiv Upadhyay,32 Lucas K.
Wagner,33 Xiao Wang,34 Alec White,2 James Daniel Whitﬁeld,35 Mark J. Williamson,36 Sebastian Wouters,37
Jun Yang,38 Jason M. Yu,39 Tianyu Zhu,2 Timothy C. Berkelbach,28, 34 Sandeep Sharma,25 Alexander Yu.
Sokolov,3 and Garnet Kin-Lic Chan2, a)
1)AxiomQuant Investment Management LLC, Shanghai, 200120, China
2)Division of Chemistry and Chemical Engineering, California Institute of Technology, Pasadena, CA 91125,
USA
3)Department of Chemistry and Biochemistry, The Ohio State University, Columbus, OH 43210,
USA
4)Beijing National Laboratory for Molecular Sciences, State Key Laboratory for Structural Chemistry
of Unstable and Stable Species, Institute of Chemistry, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing 100190,
China
5)Simbeyond B.V., P.O. Box 513, NL-5600 MB Eindhoven, The Netherlands
6)Department of Chemistry, Lensﬁeld Road, Cambridge, CB2 1EW, United Kingdom
7)Max Planck Institute for Solid State Research, Heisenbergstraße 1, 70569 Stuttgart,
Germany
8)Department of Physics, King’s College London, Strand, London WC2R 2LS, United Kingdom
9)Department of Physics, University of Florida, Gainesville, FL 32611, USA
10)Quantum Theory Project, University of Florida, Gainesville, FL 32611, USA
11)School of Chemistry, University of Bristol, Cantock’s Close, Bristol BS8 1TS, United Kingdom
12)Division of Engineering and Applied Science, California Institute of Technology, Pasadena, CA 91125,
USA
13)Google Inc., Mountain View, CA 94043, USA
14)FU Berlin, Department of Mathematics and Computer Science, Arnimallee 6, 14195 Berlin,
Germany
15)TU Berlin, Machine Learning Group, Marchstr. 23, 10587 Berlin, Germany
16)Department of Chemistry, Chemical Theory Center, and Supercomputing Institute, University of Minnesota,
207 Pleasant Street SE, Minneapolis, MN 55455, USA
17)Department of Chemistry and Biochemistry, The University of Notre Dame du Lac, 251 Nieuwland Science Hall, Notre Dame,
IN 46556, USA
18)Simune Atomistics S.L., Avenida Tolosa 76, Donostia-San Sebastian, Spain
19)Department of Chemistry, University of Helsinki, P.O. Box 55 (A. I. Virtasen aukio 1), FI-00014 Helsinki,
Finland.
20)Key Laboratory of Theoretical and Computational Photochemistry, Ministry of Education, College of Chemistry,
Beijing Normal University, Beijing 100875, China
21)Department of Chemistry, The Johns Hopkins University, Baltimore, MD 21218, USA
22)AMGEN Research, One Amgen Center Drive, Thousand Oaks, CA 91320, USA
23)DRW Holdings LLC, Chicago, IL 60661, USA
24)IBM Almaden Research Center, San Jose, CA 95120, USA
25)Department of Chemistry, University of Colorado, Boulder, CO 80302, USA
26)QuTech and Kavli Institute of Nanoscience, Delft University of Technology, The Netherlands
27)Information Technology Services, Old Dominion University, Norfolk, VA 23529, USA
28)Department of Chemistry, Columbia University, New York, NY 10027, USA
29)Istituto per i Processi Chimico Fisici del CNR (IPCF-CNR), Via G. Moruzzi, 1, 56124, Pisa,
Italy
30)Department of Chemistry, Yale University, 225 Prospect Street, New Haven, CT 06520,
USA
31)Interdisciplinary Center for Scientiﬁc Computing, Ruprecht-Karls University of Heidelberg, 205 Im Neuenheimer Feld,
69120 Heidelberg, Germany
32)Department of Chemistry, University of Pittsburgh, Pittsburgh, PA 15260
33)Department of Physics and Institute for Condensed Matter Theory, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign, IL 61801,
USA
34)Center for Computational Quantum Physics, Flatiron Institute, New York, NY 10010,
USA
35)Department of Physics and Astronomy, Dartmouth College, Hanover, NH 03755, USA
arXiv:2002.12531v2  [physics.chem-ph]  11 Jul 2020

2
36)Department of Chemistry, University of Cambridge, Lensﬁeld Road, Cambridge CB2 1EW,
United Kingdom
37)Bricsys NV, Bellevue 5/201, 9050 Gent, Belgium
38)Department of Chemistry, The University of Hong Kong, Pokfulam Road, Hong Kong SAR,
China
39)Department of Chemistry, University of California, Irvine, 1102 Natural Sciences II, Irvine, CA 92697-2025,
USA
PYSCF is a Python-based general-purpose electronic structure platform that both supports ﬁrst-principles simulations
of molecules and solids, as well as accelerates the development of new methodology and complex computational
workﬂows. The present paper explains the design and philosophy behind PYSCF that enables it to meet these twin
objectives. With several case studies, we show how users can easily implement their own methods using PYSCF as a
development environment. We then summarize the capabilities of PYSCF for molecular and solid-state simulations.
Finally, we describe the growing ecosystem of projects that use PYSCF across the domains of quantum chemistry,
materials science, machine learning and quantum information science.
I.
INTRODUCTION
This article describes the current status of the Python Sim-
ulations of Chemistry Framework, also known as PYSCF, as
of version 1.7.1. The PYSCF project was originally started
in 2014 by Sun, then in the group of Chan, in the context
of developing a tool to enable ab initio quantum embedding
calculations. However, it rapidly outgrew its rather special-
ized roots to become a general purpose development platform
for quantum simulations and electronic structure theory. The
early history of PYSCF is recounted in Ref. 1. Now, PYSCF
is a production ready tool that implements many of the most
commonly used methods in molecular quantum chemistry and
solid-state electronic structure. Since its inception, PYSCF
has been a free and open-source package hosted on Github,2
and is now also available through pip,3 conda,4 and a number
of other distribution platforms. It has a userbase numbering in
the hundreds, and over 60 code contributors. Beyond chem-
istry and materials science, it has also found use in the areas
of data science,5,6 machine learning,7–13 and quantum com-
puting,14–16 in both academia as well as in industry. To mark
its transition from a code developed by a single group to a
broader community effort, the leadership of PYSCF was ex-
panded in 2019 to a board of directors.17
While the ﬁelds of quantum chemistry and solid-state elec-
tronic structure are rich with excellent software,18–25 the de-
velopment of PySCF is guided by some unique principles. In
order of priority:
1. PYSCF should be more than a computational tool; it
should be a development platform. We aim for users
to be empowered to modify the code, implement their
own methods without the assistance of the original de-
velopers, and incorporate parts of the code in a modular
fashion into their own projects;
2. Unlike many packages which focus on either molecu-
lar chemistry or materials science applications, PYSCF
should support both equally, to allow calculations on
a)Electronic mail: gkc1000@gmail.com
molecules and materials to be carried out in the same
numerical framework and with the same theoretical ap-
proximations;
3. PYSCF should enable users outside of the chemical sci-
ences (such as workers in machine learning and quan-
tum information theory) to carry out quantum chemistry
simulations.
In the rest of this article, we elaborate on these guiding prin-
ciples of PYSCF, describing how they have impacted the pro-
gram design and implementation and how they can be used
to implement new functionality in new projects. We provide
a brief summary of the implemented methods and conclude
with an overview of the PYSCF ecosystem in different areas
of science.
II.
THE DESIGN PHILOSOPHY BEHIND PYSCF
All quantum simulation workﬂows naturally require some
level of programming and customization. This may arise in
simple tasks, such as scanning a potential energy surface, tab-
ulating results, or automating input generation, or in more ad-
vanced use cases that include more substantial programming,
such as with complex data processing, incorporating logic into
the computational workﬂow, or when embedding customized
algorithms into the computation. In either case, the ability
to program with and extend one’s simulation software greatly
empowers the user. PYSCF is designed to serve as a basic
program library that can facilitate custom computational tasks
and workﬂows, as well as form the starting point for the de-
velopment of new algorithms.
To enable this, PYSCF is constructed as a library of mod-
ular components with a loosely coupled structure. The mod-
ules provide easily reusable functions, with (where possible)
simple implementations, and hooks are provided within the
code to enable extensibility. Optimized and competitive per-
formance is, as much as possible, separated out into a small
number of lower level components which do not need to be
touched by the user. We elaborate on these design choices
below:
• Reusable functions for individual suboperations.

3
It is becoming common practice to provide a Python
scripting interface for input and simulation control.
However, PYSCF goes beyond this by providing a rich
set of Python APIs not only for the simulation models,
but also for many of the individual sub-operations that
compose the algorithms. For example, after input pars-
ing, a mean-ﬁeld Hartree-Fock (HF) or density func-
tional theory (DFT) algorithm comprises many steps,
including integral generation, guess initialization, as-
sembling components of the Fock matrix and diago-
nalizing, and accelerating iterations to self-consistent
convergence. All of these suboperations are exposed
as PYSCF APIs, enabling one to rebuild or modify
the self-consistent algorithm at will. Similarly, APIs
are exposed for other essential components of elec-
tronic structure algorithms, such as integral transforma-
tions, density ﬁtting, Hamiltonian manipulation, vari-
ous many-electron and Green’s functions solvers, com-
putation of derivatives, relativistic corrections, and so
forth, in essence across all the functionality of PYSCF.
The package provides a large number of examples to
demonstrate how these APIs can be used in customized
calculations or methodology development.
With at most some simple initialization statements, the
PYSCF APIs can be executed at any place and in any
order within a code without side-effects. This means
that when implementing or extending the code, the user
does not need to retain information on the program
state, and can focus on the physical theory of interest.
For instance, using the above example, one can call the
function to build a Fock matrix from a given density
matrix anywhere in the code, regardless of whether the
density matrix in question is related to a larger simula-
tion. From a programming design perspective, this is
because within PYSCF no implicit global variables are
used and functions are implemented free of side effects
(or with minimal side effects) in a largely functional
programming style. The PYSCF function APIs gen-
erally follow the NUMPY/SCIPY API style. In this con-
vention, the input arguments are simple Python built-in
datatypes or NUMPY arrays, avoiding the need to un-
derstand complex objects and structures.
• Simple implementations.
Python is amongst the simplest of the widely-used pro-
gramming languages and is the main implementation
language in PYSCF. Apart from a few performance
critical functions, over 90% of PYSCF is written in
Python, with dependencies on only a small number
of common external Python libraries (NUMPY, SCIPY,
H5PY).
Implementation language does not hide organiza-
tional complexity, however, and structural simplicity in
PYSCF is achieved via additional design choices. In
particular, PYSCF uses a mixed object oriented/func-
tional paradigm: complex simulation data (e.g. data on
the molecular geometry or cell parameters) and simu-
lation models (e.g. whether a mean-ﬁeld calculation is
a HF or DFT one) are organized in an object oriented
style, while individual function implementations follow
a functional programming paradigm. Deep object in-
heritance is rarely used. Unlike packages where exter-
nal input conﬁguration ﬁles are used to control a simu-
lation, the simulation parameters are simply held in the
member variables of the simulation model object.
Where possible, PYSCF provides multiple implemen-
tations of the same algorithm with the same API: one
is designed to be easy to read and simple to modify,
and another is for optimized performance. For example,
the full conﬁguration interaction module contains both
a slower but simpler implementation as well as heav-
ily optimized implementations, specialized for speciﬁc
Hamiltonian symmetries and spin types. The optimized
algorithms have components that are written in C. This
dual level of implementation mimics the Python con-
vention of having modules in both pure Python and C
with the same API (such as the PROFILE and CPROFILE
modules of the Python standard library). It also reﬂects
the PYSCF development cycle, where often a simple
reference Python implementation is ﬁrst produced be-
fore being further optimized.
• Easily modiﬁed runtime functionality.
In customized simulations, it is often necessary to mod-
ify the underlying functionality of a package. This can
be complicated in a compiled program due to the need
to consider detailed types and compilation dependen-
cies across modules. In contrast, many parts of PYSCF
are easy to modify both due to the design of PYSCF
as well as the dynamic runtime resolution of methods
and “duck typing” of Python. Generally speaking, one
can modify functionality in one part of the code without
needing to worry about breaking other parts of the pack-
age. For example, one can modify the HF module with
a custom Hamiltonian without considering whether it
will work in a DFT calculation; the program will con-
tinue to run so long as the computational task involves
HF and post-HF methods. Further, Python “monkey
patching” (replacing functionality at runtime) means
that core PYSCF routines can be overwritten without
even touching the code base of the library.
• Competitive performance.
In many simulations, performance is still the critical
consideration. This is typically the reason for imple-
menting code in compiled languages such as FORTRAN
or C/C++. In PYSCF, the performance gap between
Python and compiled languages is partly removed by a
heavy reliance on NUMPY and SCIPY, which provide
Python APIs to optimized algorithms written in com-
piled languages. Additional optimization is achieved in
PYSCF with custom C implementations where neces-
sary. Performance critical spots, which occur primarily
in the integral and tensor operations, are implemented
in C and heavily optimized. The use of additional C

4
libraries also allows us to achieve thread-level paral-
lelism via OpenMP, bypassing Python’s intrinsic mul-
tithreading limitations.
Since a simulation can often
spend over 99% of its runtime in the C libraries, the
overhead due to the remaining Python code is negligi-
ble. The combination of Python with C libraries ensures
PYSCF achieves leading performance in many simula-
tions.
III.
A COMMON FRAMEWORK FOR MOLECULES AND
CRYSTALLINE MATERIALS
Electronic structure packages typically focus on either
molecular or materials simulations, and are thus built around
numerical approximations adapted to either case. A central
goal of PYSCF is to enable molecules and materials to be sim-
ulated with common numerical approximations and theoreti-
cal models. Originally, PYSCF started as a Gaussian atomic
orbital (AO) molecular code, and was subsequently extended
to enable simulations in a crystalline Gaussian basis. Much
of the seemingly new functionality required in a crystalline
materials simulation is in fact analogous to functionality in a
molecular implementation, such as
1. Using a Bloch basis. In PYSCF we use a crystalline
Gaussian AO basis, which is analogous to a symmetry
adapted molecular AO basis;
2. Exploiting translational symmetry by enforcing mo-
mentum conservation. This is analogous to handling
molecular point group symmetries;
3. Handling complex numbers, given that matrix elements
between Bloch functions are generally complex. This
is analogous to the requirements of a molecular calcu-
lation with complex orbitals.
Other modiﬁcations are unique to the crystalline material set-
ting, including:
1. Techniques to handle divergences associated with the
long-ranged nature of the Coulomb interaction, since
the classical electron-electron, electron-nuclear, and
nuclear-nuclear interactions are separately divergent. In
PYSCF this is handled via the density ﬁtting integral
routines (see below) and by evaluating certain contribu-
tions using Ewald summation techniques;
2. Numerical techniques special to periodic functions,
such as the fast Fourier transform (FFT), as well as ap-
proximations tailored to plane-wave implementations,
such as certain pseudopotentials.
PYSCF supports
mixed crystalline Gaussian and plane-wave expres-
sions, using both analytic integrals as well as FFT on
grids;
3. Techniques to accelerate convergence to the thermody-
namic limit. In PYSCF, such corrections are imple-
mented at the mean-ﬁeld level by modifying the treat-
ment of the exchange energy, which is the leading ﬁnite-
size correction.
4. Additional crystal lattice symmetries.
Currently
PYSCF contains only experimental support for addi-
tional lattice symmetries.
In PYSCF, we identify the three-index density ﬁtted inte-
grals as the central computational intermediate that allows us
to largely unify molecular and crystalline implementations.
This is because:
1. three-center “density-ﬁtted” Gaussian integrals are key
to fast implementations;
2. The use of the FFT to evaluate the potential of a pair
density of AO functions, which is needed in fast DFT
implementations with pseudopotentials,26 is formally
equivalent to density ﬁtting with plane-waves;
3. The density ﬁtted integrals can be adjusted to remove
the Coulomb divergences in materials;27
4. three-index Coulomb intermediates are sufﬁciently
compact that they can be computed even in the crys-
talline setting.
PYSCF provides a uniﬁed density ﬁtting API for both
molecules and crystalline materials. In molecules, the aux-
iliary basis is assumed to be Gaussian AOs, while in the pe-
riodic setting, different types of auxiliary bases are provided,
including plane-wave functions (in the FFTDF module), crys-
talline Gaussian AOs (in the GDF module) and mixed plane-
wave-Gaussian functions (in the MDF module).28 Different
auxiliary bases are provided in periodic calculations as they
are suited to different AO basis sets: FFTDF is efﬁcient for
smooth AO functions when used with pseudopotentials; GDF
is more efﬁcient for compact AO functions; and MDF allows
a high accuracy treatment of the Coulomb problem regardless
of the compactness of the underlying atomic orbital basis.
Using the above ideas, the general program structure, im-
plementation, and simulation workﬂow for molecular and ma-
terials calculations become very similar. Figure 1 shows an
example of the computational workﬂow adopted in PYSCF
for performing molecular and periodic post-HF calculations.
The same driver functions can be used to carry out generic
operations such as solving the HF equations or coupled clus-
ter amplitude equations.
However, the implementations of
methods for molecular and crystalline systems bifurcate when
evaluating k-point dependent quantities, such as the three-
center density-ﬁtted integrals, Hamiltonians, and wavefunc-
tions. Nevertheless, if only a single k-point is considered (and
especially at the Γ point where all integrals are real), most
molecular modules can be used to perform calculations in
crystals without modiﬁcation (see Sec. V).
IV.
DEVELOPING WITH PYSCF: CASE STUDIES
In this section we walk through some case studies that il-
lustrate how the functionality of PYSCF can be modiﬁed and
extended. We focus on cases which might be encountered by
the average user who does not want to modify the source code,

5
build molecule
mol=gto.Mole()
build unit cell
mol=pbc.gto.Cell()
start SCF iterations
scf.kernel(mf)
diagonalize Fock matrix;
update density matrix
generate 3-center integrals
ints=df.DF(mol)
build SCF object
mf=scf.HF(mol)
mf.with_df=ints
generate 3-center integrals for
unique k-point triplets
ints=pbc.df.DF(mol, kpts)
build SCF object
mf=pbc.scf.KHF(mol,kpts)
mf.with_df=ints
build Fock matrix
for each k point
mf.with_df.get_jk()
No
Yes
build post-HF object
mycc=cc.CCSD(mf)
if molecule?
AO-to-MO tranformation
mycc._scf.with_df.ao2mo()
for unique k-point triplets:
AO-to-MO transformation
mycc._scf.with_df.ao2mo()
Yes
No
iteratively solve for
wavefunctions
cc.kernel(mycc)
if
converged?
if molecule or
cell with
single k point?
No
update wavefunctions
cc.update_amps(mycc)
converged post-HF
Yes
for each k point or
unique k-point triplets:
update wavefunctions
pbc.cc.kccsd.update_amps(mycc)
Yes
No
if molecule?
build Fock matrix
mf.with_df.get_jk()
if
converged?
No
converged SCF
Yes
build post-HF object
mycc=pbc.cc.KCCSD(mf)
FIG. 1: Illustration of the program workﬂow for molecular and periodic calculations. The orange and purple boxes indicate
functions that are k-point independent and k-point dependent, respectively; the blue boxes indicate generic driver functions that
can be used in both molecular and periodic calculations.
but wishes to assemble different existing PYSCF APIs to im-
plement new functionality.
A.
Case study: modifying the Hamiltonian
In PYSCF, simulation models (i.e. different wavefunction
approximations) are always implemented such that they can

6
be used independently of any speciﬁc Hamiltonian, with up
to two-body interactions. Consequently, the Hamiltonian un-
der study can be easily customized by the user, which is use-
ful for studying model problems or, for example, when trying
to interface to different numerical basis approximations. Fig-
ure 2 shows several different ways to deﬁne one-electron and
two-electron interactions in the Hamiltonian followed by sub-
sequent ground and excited state calculations with the custom
Hamiltonian. Note that if a method is not compatible with or
well deﬁned using the customized interactions, for instance, in
the case of solvation corrections, PYSCF will raise a Python
runtime error in the place where the requisite operations are
ill-deﬁned.
B.
Case study: optimizing orbitals of arbitrary methods
The PYSCF MCSCF module provides a general purpose
quasi-second order orbital optimization algorithm within or-
bital subspaces (e.g. active spaces) as well as over the com-
plete orbital space. In particular, it is not limited to the built-in
CASCI, CASSCF and multi-reference correlation solvers, but
allows orbital optimization of any method that provides en-
ergies and one- and two-particle density matrices. For this
reason, PYSCF is often used to carry out active space or-
bital optimization for DMRG (density matrix renormaliza-
tion group), selected conﬁguration interaction, and full con-
ﬁguration interaction quantum Monte Carlo wavefunctions,
via its native interfaces to Block29 (DMRG), CheMPS230
(DMRG), Dice31–33 (selected CI), Arrow31,33,34 (selected CI),
and NECI35 (FCIQMC).
In addition, it is easy for the user to use the MCSCF module
to optimize orbitals in electronic structure methods for which
the orbital optimization API is not natively implemented. For
example, although orbital-optimized MP236 is not explicitly
provided in PYSCF, a simple version of it can easily be per-
formed using a short script, shown in Figure 3.
Without
any modiﬁcations, the orbital optimization will use a quasi-
second order algorithm.
We see that the user only needs
to write a simple wrapper to provide two functions, namely,
make_rdm12, which computes the one- and two-particle den-
sity matrices, and kernel, which computes the total energy.
C.
Case study: implementing an embedding model
As a more advanced example of customization using
PYSCF, we now illustrate how a simple script with stan-
dard APIs enables PYSCF to carry out geometry optimiza-
tion for a wavefunction in Hartree-Fock (WFT-in-HF) embed-
ding model, shown in Figure 4 with a CISD solver. Given the
Hamiltonian of a system, expressed in terms of the Hamilto-
nians of a fragment and its environment
Hsys = Hfrag +Henv +Vee,frag-env,
Hfrag = hcore,frag +Vee,frag,
Henv = hcore,env +Vee,env,
we deﬁne an embedding Hamiltonian for the fragment in the
presence of the atoms in the environment as
Hemb = heff,frag +Vee,frag,
heff,frag = hcore,frag +(hcore,env +Veff[ρenv]),
Veff[ρenv] =
Z
Vee,envρenv(r)dr+
Z
Vee,frag-envρenv(r)dr
Geometry optimization can then be carried out with the ap-
proximate nuclear gradients of the embedding problem
Gradients = ⟨ΨCI|∂Hsys
∂X |ΨCI⟩
≈⟨ΨCI|∂Hfrag
∂X
|ΨCI⟩+⟨ΨHF|∂(Henv +Vee,frag-env)
∂X
|ΨHF⟩
= ⟨ΨCI|∂Hfrag
∂X
|ΨCI⟩−⟨ΨHF|∂Hfrag
∂X
|ΨHF⟩+⟨ΨHF|∂Hsys
∂X |ΨHF⟩
≈⟨Ψfrag,CI|∂Hfrag
∂X
|Ψfrag,CI⟩−⟨Ψfrag,HF|∂Hfrag
∂X
|Ψfrag,HF⟩+⟨ΨHF|∂Hsys
∂X |ΨHF⟩,
where the fragment wavefunction Ψfrag,HF and Ψfrag,CI are ob-
tained from the embedding Hamiltonian Hemb. The code snip-
pet in Figure 4 demonstrates the kind of rapid prototyping
that can be carried out using PYSCF APIs. In particular, this
demonstration combines the APIs for ab initio energy evalu-
ation, analytical nuclear gradient computation, computing the
HF potential for an arbitrary density matrix, Hamiltonian cus-
tomization, and customizing the nuclear gradient solver in a
geometry optimization.
V.
SUMMARY OF EXISTING METHODS AND RECENT
ADDITIONS
In this section we brieﬂy summarize major current capabil-
ities of the PYSCF package. These capabilities are listed in

7
import numpy
import pyscf
mol = pyscf.M()
n = 10
mol.nelectron = n
# Define model Hamiltonian: tight binding on a ring
h1 = numpy.zeros((n, n))
for i in range(n-1):
h1[i, i+1] = h1[i+1, i] = -1.
h1[n-1, 0] = h1[0, n-1] = -1.
# Build the 2-electron interaction tensor starting from a random 3-index tensor.
tensor = numpy.random.rand(2, n, n)
tensor = tensor + tensor.transpose(0, 2, 1)
eri = numpy.einsum(’xpq,xrs->pqrs’, tensor, tensor)
# SCF for the custom Hamiltonian
mf = mol.HF()
mf.get_hcore = lambda *args: h1
mf.get_ovlp = lambda *args: numpy.eye(n)
# Option 1: overwrite the attribute mf._eri for the 2-electron interactions
mf._eri = eri
mf.run()
# Option 2: introduce the 2-electron interaction through the Cholesky decomposed tensor.
dfmf = mf.density_fit()
dfmf.with_df._cderi = tensor
dfmf.run()
# Option 3: define a custom HF potential method
def get_veff(mol, dm):
J = numpy.einsum(’xpq,xrs,pq->rs’, tensor, tensor, dm)
K = numpy.einsum(’xpq,xrs,qr->ps’, tensor, tensor, dm)
return J - K * .5
mf.get_veff = get_veff
mf.run()
# Call the second order SCF solver in case converging the DIIS-driven HF method
# without a proper initial guess is difficult.
mf = mf.newton().run()
# Run post-HF methods based on the custom SCF object
mf.MP2().run()
mf.CISD().run()
mf.CCSD().run()
mf.CASSCF(4, 4).run()
mf.CASCI(4, 4).run().NEVPT2().run()
mf.TDHF().run()
mf.CCSD().run().EOMIP().run()
mc = shci.SHCISCF(mf, 4, 4).run()
mc = dmrgscf.DMRGSCF(mf, 4, 4).run()
FIG. 2: Hamiltonian customization and post-HF methods for customized Hamiltonians.
Table I and details are presented in the following subsections.
A.
Hartree-Fock and density functional theory methods
The starting point for many electronic structure simula-
tions is a self-consistent ﬁeld (SCF) calculation.
PYSCF
implements Hartree-Fock (HF) and density functional theory
(DFT) with a variety of Slater determinant references, includ-
ing restricted closed-shell, restricted open-shell, unrestricted,
and generalized (noncollinear spin) references,37,38 for both
molecular and crystalline (k-point) calculations. Through an
interface to the LIBXC39 and XCFUN40 libraries, PYSCF
also supports a wide range of predeﬁned exchange-correlation
(XC) functionals, including the local density approximation
(LDA), generalized gradient approximations (GGA), hybrids,

8
import numpy
import pyscf
class MP2AsFCISolver(object):
def kernel(self, h1, h2, norb, nelec, ci0=None, ecore=0, **kwargs):
# Kernel takes the set of integrals from the current set of orbitals
fakemol = pyscf.M(verbose=0)
fakemol.nelectron = sum(nelec)
fake_hf = fakemol.RHF()
fake_hf._eri = h2
fake_hf.get_hcore = lambda *args: h1
fake_hf.get_ovlp = lambda *args: numpy.eye(norb)
# Build an SCF object fake_hf without SCF iterations to perform MP2
fake_hf.mo_coeff = numpy.eye(norb)
fake_hf.mo_occ = numpy.zeros(norb)
fake_hf.mo_occ[:fakemol.nelectron//2] = 2
self.mp2 = fake_hf.MP2().run()
return self.mp2.e_tot + ecore, self.mp2.t2
def make_rdm12(self, t2, norb, nelec):
dm1 = self.mp2.make_rdm1(t2)
dm2 = self.mp2.make_rdm2(t2)
return dm1, dm2
mol = pyscf.M(atom=’H 0 0 0; F 0 0 1.1’, basis=’ccpvdz’)
mf = mol.RHF().run()
# Put in the active space all orbitals of the system
mc = pyscf.mcscf.CASSCF(mf, mol.nao, mol.nelectron)
mc.fcisolver = MP2AsFCISolver()
# Internal rotation inside the active space needs to be enabled
mc.internal_rotation = True
mc.kernel()
FIG. 3: Using the general CASSCF solver to implement an orbital-optimized MP2 method.
meta-GGAs, nonlocal correlation functionals (VV1041) and
range-separated hybrid (RSH) functionals. In addition to pre-
deﬁned XC functionals, the user can also create customized
functionals in a DFT calculation, as shown in Figure 5.
Because PYSCF uses a Gaussian AO representation, the
SCF computation is usually dominated by Gaussian integral
evaluation.
Through the efﬁcient Gaussian integral engine
LIBCINT,42 the molecular SCF module can be used with more
than 10,000 basis functions on a symmetric multiprocessing
(SMP) machine, without resorting to any integral approxima-
tions such as screening. Further speed-up can be achieved
through Gaussian density ﬁtting, and the pseudo-spectral ap-
proach (SGX) is implemented to speed up the evaluation of
exchange in large systems.43–45
In crystalline systems, HF and DFT calculations can be
carried out either at a single point in the Brillouin zone or
with a k-point mesh. The cost of the crystalline SCF cal-
culation depends on the nature of the crystalline Gaussian
basis and the associated density ﬁtting.
PYSCF supports
Goedecker-Teter-Hutter (GTH) pseudopotentials46 which can
be used with the associated basis sets (developed by the
CP2K group).26,47 Pseudopotential DFT calculations are typ-
ically most efﬁciently done using plane-wave density ﬁtting
(FFTDF). Alternatively, all-electron calculations can be per-
formed with standard basis sets, and the presence of sharp
densities means that Gaussian density ﬁtting performs better.
Gaussian density ﬁtting is also the algorithm of choice for
calculations with HF exchange. Figure 6 shows an example
of the silicon band structures computed using a GTH-LDA
pseudopotential with FFTDF, and in an all-electron calcula-
tion using GDF.
B.
Many-body methods
Starting from a SCF HF or DFT wavefunction, vari-
ous many-body methods are available in PYSCF, includ-
ing Møller-Plesset second-order perturbation theory (MP2),
multi-reference perturbation theory (MRPT),48,49 conﬁgura-
tion interaction (CI),50–53 coupled cluster (CC),54–63 multi-
conﬁguration self-consistent ﬁeld (MCSCF),64,65 algebraic di-
agrammatic construction (ADC)66–70 and G0W071–74 meth-
ods. The majority of these capabilities are available for both
molecules and crystalline materials.
1.
Molecular implementations
The PYSCF CI module implements solvers for conﬁgura-
tion interaction with single and double excitations (CISD),
and a general full conﬁguration interaction (FCI) solver that

9
import pyscf
frag = pyscf.M(atom=’frag.xyz’, basis=’ccpvtz’)
env
= pyscf.M(atom=’env.xyz’, basis=’sto-3g’)
sys = frag + env
def embedding_gradients(sys):
# Regular HF energy and nuclear gradients of the entire system
sys_hf = sys.HF().run()
grad_sys = sys_hf.Gradients().kernel()
# Construct a CASCI-like effective 1-electron Hamiltonian for the fragment
# with the presence of outlying atoms in the environment. dm_env is the
# density matrix in the environment block
dm_env = sys_hf.make_rdm1()
dm_env[frag.nao:,:] = dm_env[:,frag.nao:] = 0
frag_hcore_eff = (sys_hf.get_hcore() + sys_hf.get_veff(sys, dm_env))[:frag.nao, :frag.nao]
# Customize the zeroth order calculation by overwriting the core Hamiltonian.
# HF and CISD now provide the embedding wavefunction on fragment.
geom_frag = sys.atom_coords(unit=’Angstrom’)[:frag.natm]
frag.set_geom_(geom_frag)
frag_hf = frag.HF()
frag_hf.get_hcore = lambda *args: frag_hcore_eff
frag_hf.run()()
frag_ci = frag_hf.CISD().run()
# The .Gradients() method enables a regular analytical nuclear gradient object
# to evaluate the Hellmann-Feynman forces on fragment using the first order
# derivatives of the original fragment Hamiltonian and the variational
# embedding wavefunction.
grad_hf_frag = frag_hf.Gradients().kernel()
grad_ci_frag = frag_ci.Gradients().kernel()
# Approximate the energy and gradients of the entire system with the post-HF
# correction on fragment
approx_e = sys_hf.e_tot + frag_ci.e_tot - frag_hf.e_tot
approx_grad = grad_sys
approx_grad[:frag.natm] += grad_ci - grad_hf
print(’Approximate gradients:\n’, approx_grad)
return approx_e, approx_grad
new_sys = pyscf.geomopt.as_pyscf_method(sys,\
embedding_gradients).Gradients().optimizer().kernel()
FIG. 4: An advanced example that implements geometry optimization based on a WFT-in-HF embedding model using
standard PYSCF APIs.
can treat fermion, boson and coupled fermion-boson Hamil-
tonians. The FCI solver is heavily optimized for its multi-
threaded performance and can efﬁciently handle active spaces
with up to 18 electrons in 18 orbitals.
The CC module implements coupled cluster theory with
single and double excitations (CCSD)56,61 and with the pertur-
bative triples correction [CCSD(T)].57 Λ-equation solvers are
implemented to compute one- and two-particle density matri-
ces, as well as the analytic nuclear gradients for the CCSD
and CCSD(T) methods.55,58,59 PYSCF also implements vari-
ous ﬂavours of equation-of-motion CCSD to compute electron
afﬁnities (EA), ionization potentials (IP), neutral excitation
energies (EE), and spin-ﬂip excitation energies (SF).54,60,62,63
Experimental support for beyond doubles corrections to IP
and EA via IP-EOM-CCSD*75,76 and EA-EOM-CCSD* is
also available. For very large basis sets, PYSCF provides an
efﬁcient AO-driven pathway which allows calculations with
more than 1500 basis functions. An example of this is shown
in Figure 7, where the largest CCSD(T) calculation contains
50 electrons and 1500 basis functions.77
Second- and third-order algebraic diagrammatic construc-
tion (ADC) methods are also available in PYSCF for the
calculation of molecular electron afﬁnities and ionization
potentials66–70 [EA/IP-ADC(n), n = 2, 3]. These have a lower
cost than EA/IP-EOM-CCSD. The advantage of the ADC
methods over EOM-CCSD is that their amplitude equations
can be solved in one iteration and the eigenvalue problem is
Hermitian, which lowers the cost of computing the EA/IP en-
ergies and transition intensities.
The MCSCF module provides complete active space con-

10
TABLE I: Major features of PYSCF as of version 1.7.1.
Methods
Molecules
Solids
Comments
HF
Yes
Yes
∼10000 AOsa
MP2
Yes
Yes
∼1500 MOsa
DFT
Yes
Yes
∼10000 AOsa
TDDFT/TDHF/TDA/CIS
Yes
Yes
∼10000 AOsa
G0W0
Yes
Yes
∼1500 MOsa
CISD
Yes
Yesb
∼1500 MOsa
FCI
Yes
Yesb
∼(18e, 18o)a
IP/EA-ADC(2)
Yes
No
∼500 MOsa,c
IP/EA-ADC(2)-X
Yes
No
∼500 MOsa,c
IP/EA-ADC(3)
Yes
No
∼500 MOsa,c
CCSD
Yes
Yes
∼1500 MOsa
CCSD(T)
Yes
Yes
∼1500 MOsa
IP/EA/EE-EOM-CCSDd
Yes
Yes
∼1500 MOsa
MCSCF
Yes
Yesb
∼3000 AOs,a 30–50 active orbitalse
MRPT
Yes
Yesb
∼1500 MOs,a 30–50 active orbitalse
QM/MM
Yes
No
Semiempirical
Yes
No
MINDO3
Relativity
Yes
No
ECP and scalar-relativistic corrections for all methods. 2-component methods
for HF, DFT, DMRG and SHCI. 4-component methods for HF and DFT.
Gradients
Yes
No
HF, MP2, DFT, TDDFT, CISD, CCSD, CCSD(T), MCSCF and MINDO3
Hessian
Yes
No
HF and DFT
Orbital Localizer
Yes
Yes
NAO,
meta-Löwdin,
IAO/IBO,
VVO/LIVVO,
Foster-Boys,
Edmis-
ton–Ruedenberg, Pipek–Mezey and Maximally-localized Wannier functions
Properties
Yes
Yesf
EFGs, Mössbauer spectroscopy, NMR, magnetizability, and polarizability, etc.
Solvation
Yes
No
ddCOSMO, ddPCM, and polarizable embedding
AO, MO integrals
Yes
Yes
1-electron and 2-electron integrals
Density ﬁtting
Yes
Yes
HF, DFT, MP2 and CCSD
Symmetry
Yes
Nog
D2h and subgroups for molecular HF, MCSCF, and FCI
a An estimate based on a single SMP node with 128 GB memory without density ﬁtting;
b Γ-point only;
c In-core implementation limited by storing two-electron integrals in memory;
d Perturbative corrections to IP and EA via IP-EOM-CCSD* and EA-EOM-CCSD* are available for both molecules and crystals;
e Using an external DMRG, SHCI, or FCIQMC program (as listed in Section IV B) as the active space solver;
f EFGs and Mössbauer spectra only;
g Experimental support for point-group and time-reversal symmetries in crystals at the SCF and MP2 levels.
import pyscf
mol = pyscf.M(atom = ’N 0 0 0; N 0 0 1.1’ , basis = ’ccpvdz’)
mf = mol.RKS()
mf.xc =’CAMB3LYP’
mf.xc = ’’’0.19*SR_HF(0.33) + 0.65*LR_HF(0.33) + 0.46*ITYH + 0.35*B88, 0.19*VWN5 + 0.81*LYP’’’
mf.xc = ’RSH(0.33, 0.65, -0.46) + 0.46*ITYH + 0.35*B88, 0.19*VWN5 + 0.81*LYP’
e_mf = mf.kernel()
FIG. 5: An example of two customized RSH functionals that are equivalent to the CAM-B3LYP functional.
ﬁguration interaction (CASCI) and complete active space self-
consistent ﬁeld (CASSCF)64,65 methods for multi-reference
problems.
As discussed in section IV B, the module also
provides a general second-order orbital optimizer78 that can
optimize the orbitals of external methods, with native inter-
faces for the orbital optimization of density matrix renor-
malization group (DMRG),29,30 full conﬁguration interaction
quantum Monte Carlo (FCIQMC),35,79 and selected conﬁgu-
ration interaction wavefunctions.31,32 Starting from a CASCI
or CASSCF wavefunction, PYSCF also implements the
strongly-contracted second-order n-electron valence perturba-
tion theory48,49 (SC-NEVPT2) in the MRPT module to in-
clude additional dynamic correlation. Together with external
active-space solvers this enables one to treat relatively large
active spaces for such calculations, as illustrated in Figure 8.

11
FIG. 6: All-electron and pseudopotential LDA band
structures of the Si crystal. Reprinted from Ref. 28, with the
permission of AIP Publishing.
2.
Crystalline implementations
As discussed in section III, the PYSCF implementations of
many-body methods for crystalline systems closely parallel
their molecular implementations. In fact, all molecular mod-
ules can be used to carry out calculations in solids at the Γ-
point and many modules (those supporting complex integrals)
can be used at any other single k-point. Such single k-point
calculations only require the appropriate periodic integrals to
be supplied to the many-body solver (Figure 9). For those
modules that support complex integrals, twist averaging can
then be performed to sample the Brillouin zone. To use sav-
ings from k-point symmetries, an additional summation over
momentum conserving k-point contributions needs to be ex-
plicitly implemented. Such implementations are provided for
MP2, CCSD, CCSD(T), IP/EA-EOM-CCSD27 and EE-EOM-
CCSD,80 and G0W0. For example, Figure 10 shows the MP2
correlation energy and the CIS excitation energy of MgO,
calculated using periodic density-ﬁtted implementations; the
largest system shown, with a 7×7×7 k-point mesh, correlates
5,488 valence electrons in 9,261 orbitals. Furthermore, Figure
11 shows some examples of periodic correlated calculations
on NiO carried out using the G0W0 and CCSD methods.
C.
Eﬃciency
In Table I, we provide rough estimates of the sizes of prob-
lems that can be tackled using PYSCF for each electronic
structure method.
Figs. 7, 8, 10, and 11 illustrate some
real-world examples of calculations performed using PYSCF.
Note that the size of system that can be treated is a function
of the computational resources available; the estimates given
above assume relatively standard and modest computational
resources, e.g. a node of a cluster, or a few dozen cores. For
more details of the runtime environment and program settings
for similar performance benchmarks, we refer readers to the
benchmark page of the PySCF website www.pyscf.org. The
TABLE II: Wall time (in seconds) for building the Fock
matrix in a supercell DFT calculation of water clusters
with the GTH-TZV2P26,47 basis set, using the SVWN82
and the PBE83 XC functionals and corresponding
pseudopotenials, respectively. Integral screening and
lattice summation cutoff were controlled by an overall
threshold of 10−6 a.u. for Fock matrix elements. The
calculations were performed on one computer node with
32 Intel Xeon Broadwell (E5-2697v4) processors.
System
NAOa
SVWN
PBE
[H2O]32
1,280
8
23
[H2O]64
2,560
20
56
[H2O]128
5,120
74
253
[H2O]256
12,800
276
1201
[H2O]512
25,600
1279
4823
a Number of AO basis functions.
implementation and performance of PYSCF on massively
parallel architectures is discussed in section V H.
For molecular calculations using mean-ﬁeld methods,
PYSCF can treat systems with more than 10,000 AO ba-
sis functions without difﬁculty. Fig. 15 shows the time of
building the HF Fock matrix for a large water cluster with
more than 12,000 basis functions. With the integral screen-
ing threshold set to 10−13 a.u., it takes only around 7 hours
on one computer node with 32 CPU cores. Applying MPI
parallelization further reduces the Fock-build time (see sec-
tion V H). For periodic boundary calculations at the DFT level
using pure XC functionals, even larger systems can be treated
using pseudopotentials and a multi-grid implementation. Ta-
ble II presents an example of such a calculation, where for the
largest system considered ([H2O]512 with more than 25,000
basis functions), the Fock-build time is about an hour or less
on a single node.
To demonstrate the efﬁciency of the many-body method im-
plementations, in Tables III and IV we show timing data of ex-
emplary CCSD and FCI calculations. It is clear that systems
with more than 1,500 basis functions can be easily treated at
the CCSD level and that the FCI implementation in PYSCF is
very efﬁcient. In a similar way, the estimated performance for
other many-body methods implemented in PYSCF is listed in
Table I.
D.
Properties
At the mean-ﬁeld level, the current PYSCF program can
compute various nonrelativistic and four-component relativis-
tic molecular properties. These include NMR shielding and
spin-spin coupling tensors,84–89 electronic g-tensors,90–93 nu-
clear spin-rotation constants and rotational g-tensors,94,95 hy-
perﬁne coupling (HFC) tensors,96,97 electron spin-rotation
(ESR) tensors,98,99 magnetizability tensors,94,100,101 zero-ﬁeld
splitting (ZFS) tensors,102–104 as well as static and dynamic
polarizability and hyper-polarizability tensors.
The contri-
butions from spin-orbit coupling and spin-spin coupling can

12
up to 50 H atoms and 
1500 AO basis functions
FIG. 7: Energies of a hydrogen chain computed at the restricted CCSD and CCSD(T) levels extrapolated to the complete basis
set (CBS) and thermodynamic limits. The left-hand panel shows extrapolation of ECBS(N) versus 1/N, where N is the number
of atoms; while the right-hand panel shows extrapolation of Ecc−pVxZ(N →∞) versus 1/x3 with x equal to 2, 3 and 4
corresponding to double-, triple- and quadruple-zeta basis, respectively. Adapted from Ref. 77.
TABLE III: Wall time (in seconds) for the ﬁrst CCSD
iteration in AO-driven CCSD calculations on hydrogen
chains. The threshold of integral screening was set to
10−13 a.u.. For these hydrogen chain molecules, CCSD
takes around 10 iterations to converge. The calculations
were performed on one computer node with 28 Intel
Xeon Broadwell (E5-2697v4) processors.
System/basis set
Nocca
Nvirtb
time
H30/cc-pVQZ
15
884
621
H30/cc-pV5Z
15
1631
6887
H50/cc-pVQZ
25
1472
8355
a Number of active occupied orbitals;
b Number of active virtual orbitals.
TABLE IV: Wall time (in seconds) for one FCI iteration
for different active-space sizes. The calculations were
performed on one computer node with 32 Intel Xeon
Broadwell (E5-2697v4) processors.
Active space
time
(12e, 12o)
0.1
(14e, 14o)
0.7
(16e, 16o)
8
(18e, 18o)
156
also be calculated and included in the g-tensors, HFC tensors,
ZFS tensors, and ESR tensors. In magnetic property calcu-
lations, approximate gauge-origin invariance is ensured for
NMR shielding, g-tensors, and magnetizability tensors via the
use of gauge including atomic orbitals.94,100,101,105,106
Electric
ﬁeld
gradients
(EFGs)
and
Mössbauer
parameters107–109 can be computed using either the mean-
ﬁeld electron density, or the correlated density obtained from
non-relativistic Hamiltonians, spin-free exact-two-component
(X2C) relativistic Hamiltonians110–114 or four-component
methods, in both molecules and crystals.
Finally, analytic nuclear gradients for the molecular ground
state are available at the mean-ﬁeld level and for many
of the electron correlation methods such as MP2, CCSD,
CISD, CASCI and CASSCF (see Table I). The CASCI gra-
dient implementation supports the use of external solvers,
such as DMRG, and provides gradients for such methods.
PYSCF also implements the analytical gradients of time-
dependent density functional theory (TDDFT) with or without
the Tamm-Dancoff approximation (TDA) for excited state ge-
ometry optimization. The spin-free X2C relativistic Hamilto-
nian, frozen core approximations, solvent effects, and molecu-
lar mechanics (MM) environments can be combined with any
of the nuclear gradient methods. Vibrational frequency and
thermochemical analysis can also be performed, using the an-
alytical Hessians from mean-ﬁeld level calculations, or nu-
merical Hessians of methods based on numerical differentia-
tion of analytical gradients.
E.
Orbital localization
PYSCF provides two kinds of orbital localization in the LO
module. The ﬁrst kind localizes orbitals based on the atomic
character of the basis functions, and can generate intrinsic
atomic orbitals (IAOs),115 natural atomic orbitals (NAOs),116
and meta-Löwdin orbitals.117 These AO-based local orbitals
can be used to carry out reliable population analysis in arbi-
trary basis sets.
The second kind optimizes a cost function to produce lo-
calized orbitals.
PYSCF implements Boys localization,118
Edmiston-Ruedenberg
localization,119
and
Pipek–Mezey
localization.120 Starting from the IAOs, one can also use or-
bital localization based on the Pipek-Mezey procedure to con-
struct the intrinsic bond orbitals (IBOs).115 A similar method

13
DMRG-CASSCF(22e, 27o)
cc-pV5Z (~3000 AO functions)
E (3B1g) = -2245.306 Eh 
E (5Ag)  = -2245.312 Eh 
Cr
Cr
(a)
(b)
FIG. 8: (a) Ground-state energy calculations for
Fe(II)-porphine at the DMRG-CASSCF/cc-pV5Z level with
an active space of 22 electrons in 27 orbitals.78 (b) Potential
energy curve for Cr2 at the DMRG-SC-NEVPT2 (12e, 22o)
level, compared to the results from other methods. Adapted
with permission from Ref. 49. Copyright (2016) American
Chemical Society.
can also be used to construct localized intrinsic valence virtual
orbitals that can be used to assign core-excited states.121 The
optimization in these localization routines takes advantage
of the second order coiterative augmented Hessian (CIAH)
algorithm122 for rapid convergence.
For crystalline calculations with k-point sampling, PYSCF
also provides maximally-localised Wannier functions (ML-
WFs) via a native interface to the WANNIER90 program.123
Different types of orbitals are available as initial guesses
for the MLWFs, including the atomic orbitals provided by
WANNIER90, meta-Löwdin orbitals,117 and localized or-
bitals from the selected columns of density matrix (SCDM)
method.124,125 Figure 12 illustrates the IBOs and MLWFs of
diamond computed by PYSCF.
F.
QM/MM and solvent
PYSCF incorporates two continuum solvation models,
namely, the conductor-like screening model126 (COSMO) and
the polarizable continuum model using the integral equation
formalism127,128 (IEF-PCM). Both of them are implemented
efﬁciently via a domain decomposition (dd) approach,129–133
and are compatible with most of the electronic structure
methods in PYSCF. Furthermore, besides equilibrium solva-
tion where the solvent polarization is governed by the static
electric susceptibility, non-equilibrium solvation can also be
treated within the framework of TDDFT, in order to describe
fast solvent response with respect to abrupt changes of the so-
lute charge density. As an example, in Ref. 134, the COSMO
method was used to mimic the protein environment of nitroge-
nase in electronic structure calculations for the P-cluster (Fig-
ure 13). For excited states generated by TDA, the polarizable
embedding model135 can also be used through an interface to
the external library CPPE.135,136
Currently, PYSCF provides some limited functionality for
performing QM/MM calculations by adding classical point
charges to the QM region. The implementation supports all
molecular electronic structure methods by decorating the un-
derlying SCF methods. In addition, MM charges can be used
together with the X2C method and implicit solvent treatments.
G.
Relativistic treatments
PYSCF provides several ways to include relativistic ef-
fects.
In the framework of scalar Hamiltonians, spin-free
X2C theory,137 scalar effective core potentials138 (ECP) and
relativistic pseudo-potentials can all be used for all meth-
ods in calculations of the energy, nuclear gradients and nu-
clear Hessians. At the next level of relativistic approxima-
tions, PYSCF provides spin-orbit ECP integrals, and one-
body and two-body spin-orbit interactions from the Breit-
Pauli Hamiltonian and X2C Hamiltonian for the spin-orbit
coupling effects.139 Two component Hamiltonians with the
X2C one-electron approximation, and four-component Dirac-
Coulomb, Dirac-Coulomb-Gaunt, and Dirac-Coulomb-Breit
Hamiltonians are all supported in mean-ﬁeld molecular calcu-
lations.
H.
MPI implementations
In PYSCF, distributed parallelism with MPI is imple-
mented via an extension to the PYSCF main library known as
MPI4PYSCF. The current MPI extension supports the most
common methods in quantum chemistry and crystalline ma-
terial computations. Table V lists the available MPI-parallel
alternatives to the default serial (OpenMP) implementations.
The MPI-enabled modules implement almost identical APIs

14
import pyscf
cell = pyscf.M(atom=..., a=...) # ’a’ defines lattice vectors
mf = cell.HF(kpt = [0.23,0.23,0.23]).run()
# Use PBC CCSD class so integrals are handled
# correctly with respect to Coulomb divergences
mycc = pyscf.pbc.cc.CCSD(mf)
# molecular CCSD code used to compute correlation energy at single k-point
converged, ecorr = pyscf.cc.ccsd.kernel(mycc)
FIG. 9: Illustration of using the molecular code to compute an energy in crystal at a single k-point.
FIG. 10: Periodic MP2 correlation energy per unit cell (top)
and CIS excitation energy (bottom) as a function of the
number of k-points sampled in the Brillouin zone for the
MgO crystal.
to the serial ones, allowing the same script to be used for se-
rial jobs and MPI-parallel jobs (Figure 14). The efﬁciency of
the MPI implementation is demonstrated in Figure 15, which
shows the wall time and speedup of Fock builds for a system
with 12,288 AOs with up to 64 MPI processes, each with 32
OpenMP threads.
To retain the simplicity of the PYSCF package structure,
we use a server-client mechanism to execute the MPI parallel
code. In particular, we use MPI to start the Python interpreter
as a daemon that receives both the functions and data on re-
mote nodes. When a parallel session is activated, the mas-
ter process sends the functions and data to the daemons. The
function object is decoded remotely and then executed. For
example, when building the Fock matrix in the PySCF MPI
implementation, the Fock-build function running on the mas-
TABLE V: Methods with MPI support. For solids, MPI
support is currently provided only at the level of
parallelization over k-points.
Methods
Molecules
Solids
HF
Yes
Yes
DFT
Yes
Yes
MP2
Yesa
Yes
CCSD
Yesa
Yes
a closed shell systems only
ter process ﬁrst sends itself to the Python interpreters running
on the clients. After the function is decoded on the clients,
input variables (like the density matrix) are distributed by the
master process through MPI. Each client evaluates a subset
of the four-center two-electron integrals (with load balancing
performed among the clients) and constructs a partial Fock
matrix, similarly to the Fock-build functions in other MPI im-
plementations. After sending the partial Fock matrices back
to the master process, the client suspends itself until it re-
ceives the next function. The master process assembles the
Fock matrices and then moves on to the next part of the code.
The above strategy is quite different from traditional MPI pro-
grams that hard-code MPI functionality into the code and ini-
tiate the MPI parallel context at the beginning of the program.
This PYSCF design brings the important beneﬁt of being able
to switch on and off MPI parallelism freely in the program
without the need to be aware of the MPI-parallel context. See
Ref. 1 for a more detailed discussion of PYSCF MPI mode
innovations.
VI.
THE PYSCF SIMULATION ECOSYSTEM
PYSCF is widely used as a development tool, and many
groups have developed and made available their own projects
that either interface to PYSCF or can be used in a tightly cou-
pled manner to access greater functionality. We provide a few
examples of the growing PYSCF ecosystem below, which we
separate into use cases: (1) external projects to which PYSCF
provides and maintains a native interface, and (2) external
projects that build on PYSCF.

15
(a)
(b)
x [Å]
y [Å]
FIG. 11: Electronic structure calculations for antiferromagnetic NiO. (a) Density of states and band gaps computed by G0W0.
(b) Normalized spin density on the (100) surface by CCSD (the Ni atom is located at the center). Adapted from Ref. 81.
(a)
(b)
FIG. 12: (a) IBOs for diamond at the Γ-point (showing one
σ bond); (b) MLWFs for diamond computed within the
valence IAO subspace (showing one sp3 orbital).
A.
External projects with native interfaces
PYSCF currently maintains a few native interfaces to ex-
ternal projects, including:
• GEOMETRIC140 and PYBERNY.141 These two libraries
provide the capability to perform geometry optimiza-
tion and interfaces to them are provided in the PYSCF
GEOMOPT module. As shown in Figure 4, given a
method that provides energies and nuclear gradients,
the geometry optimization module generates an object
that can then be used by these external optimization li-
braries.
• DFTD3.142,143
This interface allows to add the
DFTD3142 correction to the total ground state energy as
well as to the nuclear gradients in geometry optimiza-
tions.
• DMRG, SHCI, and FCIQMC programs (BLOCK,29
FIG. 13: Illustration of P-cluster (the [Fe8S7] cluster of
nitrogenase) calculations where the COSMO solvation model
was used to mimic the protein environment of nitrogenase
beyond the ﬁrst coordination sphere. Fe, orange; S, yellow;
C, cyan; O, red; N, blue; H, white; Si, pink. Adapted from
Ref. 134.
CHEMPS2,30
DICE,31–33
ARROW,31,33,34
and
NECI35).
These
interfaces
closely
follow
the
conventions of PYSCF’s FCI module. As such, they
can be used to replace the FCI solver in MCSCF
methods (CASCI and CASSCF) to study large active
space multi-reference problems.
• LIBXC39 and XCFUN.40 These two libraries are tightly
integrated into the PYSCF code. While the PYSCF
DFT module allows the user to customize exchange cor-
relation (XC) functionals by linearly combining differ-

16
# run in cmdline:
# mpirun -np 4 python input.py
import pyscf
mol = pyscf.M(...)
# Serial task
from pyscf import dft
mf = dft.RKS(mol).run(xc=’b3lyp’)
J, K = mf.get_jk(mol, mf.make_rdm1())
# MPI-parallel task
from mpi4pyscf import dft
mf = dft.RKS(mol).run(xc=’b3lyp’)
J, K = mf.get_jk(mol, mf.make_rdm1())
FIG. 14: Code snippet showing the similarity between serial
and MPI-parallel DFT calculations.
0
10
20
30
40
50
60
Number of MPI processes
0
5000
10000
15000
20000
25000
Wall time (s)
0
10
20
30
40
50
60
speed up
FIG. 15: Computation wall time of building the Fock matrix
for the [H2O]512 cluster at the HF/VDZ level (12288 AO
functions) using PYSCF’s MPI implementation. Each MPI
process contains 32 OpenMP threads and the speedup is
compared to the single-node calculation with 32 OpenMP
threads.
ent functionals, the individual XC functionals and their
derivatives are evaluated within these libraries.
• TBLIS.144–146 The tensor contraction library TB-
LIS offers similar functionality to the numpy.einsum
function while delivering substantial speedups.
Un-
like the BLAS-based “transpose-GEMM-transpose”
scheme which involves a high memory footprint due
to the transposed tensor intermediates, TBLIS achieves
optimal tensor contraction performance without such
memory overhead.
The TBLIS interface in PYSCF
provides an einsum function which implements the
numpy.einsum API but with the TBLIS library as the
contraction back-end.
• CPPE.135,136 This library provides a polarizable em-
bedding solvent model and can be integrated into
PYSCF calculations for ground-state mean-ﬁeld and
post-SCF methods. In addition, an interface to TDA
is currently supported for excited-state calculations.
B.
External projects that build on PySCF
There are many examples in the literature of quantum
chemistry and electronic structure simulation packages that
build on PYSCF. The list below is by no means exhaustive,
but gives an idea of the range of projects using PYSCF today.
1. Quantum Monte Carlo.
Several quantum Monte
Carlo programs, such as QMCPACK,147 PYQMC,148
QWALK,149 and HANDE150 support reading wave-
functions and/or Hamiltonians generated by PYSCF. In
the case of PYQMC, PYSCF is integrated as a depen-
dent module.
2. Quantum embedding packages.
Many ﬂavours of
quantum embedding, including density matrix em-
bedding and dynamical mean-ﬁeld theory, have been
implemented on top of PYSCF. Examples of such
packages
include
QSOME,151–153
PDMET,154,155
PYDMFET,156
POTATO,157,158
and
the
OPEN-
QEMIST package,16 which all use PYSCF to manip-
ulate wavefunctions and embedding Hamiltonians and
to provide many-electron solvers.
3. General quantum chemistry. PYSCF can be found as a
component of tools developed for many different kinds
of calculations, including localized active space self-
consistent ﬁeld (LASSCF),154 multiconﬁguration pair-
density functional theory (MC-PDFT),159 and state-
averaged CASSCF energy and analytical gradient eval-
uation (these all use the PYSCF MCSCF module to op-
timize multi-reference wavefunctions), as well as for
localized orbital construction via the PYWANNIER90
library.155 The PYMBE package,160 which imple-
ments the many-body expanded full CI method,161–164
utilizes PYSCF to perform all the underlying elec-
tronic structure calculations. Green’s functions meth-
ods such as the second-order Green’s function the-
ory (GF2) and the self-consistent GW approximation
have been explored using PYSCF as the underlying ab
initio infrastructure.165 In the linear scaling program
LSQC,166,167 PYSCF is used to generate reference
wavefunctions and integrals for the cluster-in-molecule
local correlation method.
The APDFT (alchemical
perturbation density functional theory) program168,169
interfaces to PYSCF for QM calculations.
In the
PYSCF-NAO project,170 large-scale ground-state and
excited-state methods are implemented based on ad-
ditional support for numerical atomic orbitals, which
has been integrated into an active branch of PYSCF.

17
The PYFLOSIC package171 evaluates self-interaction
corrections with Fermi-Löwdin orbitals in conjunction
with the PYSCF DFT module. Further, PYSCF FCI ca-
pabilities are used in the MOLSTURM package172 for the
development of Coulomb Sturmian basis functions, and
PYSCF post-HF methods appear in VELOXCHEM173
and ADCC174 for spectroscopic and excited-state simu-
lations.
VII.
BEYOND ELECTRONIC STRUCTURE
A.
PySCF in the materials genome initiative and machine
learning
As discussed in section I, one of our objectives when de-
veloping PYSCF was to create a tool which could be used by
non-specialist researchers in other ﬁelds. With the integration
of machine learning techniques into molecular and materials
simulations, we ﬁnd that PYSCF is being used in many ap-
plications in conjunction with machine learning. For exam-
ple, the ﬂexibility of the PYSCF DFT module has allowed
it to be used to test exchange-correlation functionals gener-
ated by machine-learning protocols in several projects,7,8 and
has been integrated into other machine learning workﬂows.9,10
PYSCF can be used as a large-scale computational engine for
quantum chemistry data generation.5,6 Also, in the context of
machine learning of wavefunctions, PYSCF has been used as
the starting point to develop neural network based approaches
for SCF initial guesses,11 for the learning of HF orbitals by
the DeepMind team,12 and for Hamiltonian integrals used by
fermionic neural nets in NETKET.13
B.
PySCF in quantum information science
Another area where PYSCF has been rapidly adopted as a
development tool is in the area of quantum information sci-
ence and quantum computing. This is likely because Python
is the de-facto standard programming language in the quan-
tum computing community. For example, PYSCF is one of
the standard prerequisites to carry out molecular simulations
in the OPENFERMION14 library, the QISKIT-AQUA15 library
and the OPENQEMIST16 package.
Via PYSCF’s GitHub
page, we see a rapidly increasing number of quantum infor-
mation projects which include PYSCF as a program depen-
dency.
VIII.
OUTLOOK
After ﬁve years of development, the PYSCF project can
probably now be considered to be a feature complete and ma-
ture tool. Although no single package can be optimal for all
tasks, we believe PYSCF to a large extent meets its original
development criteria of forming a library that is not only use-
ful in simulations but also in enabling the customization and
development of new electronic structure methods.
With the recent release of version 1.7, the current year
marks the end of development of the version 1 branch of
PYSCF. As we look towards PYSCF version 2, we ex-
pect to build additional innovations, for example, in the ar-
eas of faster electronic structure methods for very large sys-
tems, further support and integration for machine learning and
quantum computing applications, better integration of high-
performance computing libraries and more parallel implemen-
tations, and perhaps even forays into dynamics and classical
simulations. Beyond feature development, we will expand our
efforts in documentation and in quality assurance and testing.
We expect the directions of implementation to continue to be
guided by and organically grow out of the established PYSCF
ecosystem. However, regardless of the scientiﬁc directions
and methods implemented within PYSCF, the guiding philos-
ophy described in this article will continue to lie at the heart of
PYSCF’s development. We believe these guiding principles
will help ensure that PYSCF remains a powerful and useful
tool in the community for many years to come.
DATA AVAILABILITY STATEMENT
The data that supports the ﬁndings of this study are avail-
able within the article, and/or from the corresponding author
upon reasonable request.
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
As a large package, the development of PYSCF has
been supported by different sources.
Support from the
US National Science Foundation via award no.
1931258
(T.C.B., G.K-L.C., and L.K.W.) is acknowledged to integrate
high-performance parallel infrastructure and faster mean-ﬁeld
methods into PYSCF. Support from the US National Sci-
ence Foundation via award no.
1657286 (G.K.-L.C.) and
award no.
1848369 (T.C.B.) is acknowledged for various
aspects of the development of many-electron wavefunction
methods with periodic boundary conditions. Support for in-
tegrating PYSCF into quantum computing platforms is pro-
vided partially by the Department of Energy via award no.
19374 (G.K.-L.C). The Simons Foundation is gratefully ac-
knowledged for providing additional support for the contin-
ued maintenance and development of PYSCF. The Flatiron
Institute is a division of the Simons Foundation. M.B. ac-
knowledges support from the Departemento de Educación of
the Basque Government through a PhD grant, as well as from
Euskampus and the DIPC at the initial stages of his work.
J.C. is supported by the Center for Molecular Magnetic Quan-
tum Materials (M2QM), an Energy Frontier Research Center
funded by the US Department of Energy, Ofﬁce of Science,
Basic Energy Sciences under Award de-sc0019330. J.J.E. ac-
knowledges ﬁnancial support from the Alexander von Hum-
boldt Foundation and the Independent Research Fund Den-
mark.
M.R.H. and H.Q.P. were partially supported by the
U.S. Department of Energy, Ofﬁce of Science, Basic En-
ergy Sciences, Division of Chemical Sciences, Geosciences

18
and Biosciences under Award #DE-FG02-17ER16362, while
working in the group of Laura Gagliardi at the University
of Minnesota. P.K. acknowledges ﬁnancial support from the
Fellows Gipuzkoa program of the Gipuzkoako Foru Aldun-
dia through the FEDER funding scheme of the European
Union. S.L. has been supported by the Academy of Finland
(Suomen Akatemia) through project number 311149.
A.P.
thanks Swiss NSF for the support provided through the Early
Postdoc. Mobility program (project P2ELP2_175281). H.F.S
acknowledges the ﬁnancial support from the European Union
via Marie Skłodowska-Curie Grant Agreement No. 754388
and LMUexcellent within the German Excellence Initiative
(No. ZUK22). S.B. and J.E.T.S. gratefully acknowledge sup-
port from a fellowship through The Molecular Sciences Soft-
ware Institute under NSF Grant ACI-1547580. S.S. acknowl-
edges support of NSF grant CHE-1800584. S.U. acknowl-
edges the support of NSF grant CHE-1762337. The National
Science Foundation Graduate Research Fellowship Program
is acknowledged for support of J.M.Y.
1Q. Sun, T. C. Berkelbach, N. S. Blunt, G. H. Booth, S. Guo, Z. Li, J. Liu,
J. D. McClain, E. R. Sayfutyarova, S. Sharma, S. Wouters, and G. K.-L.
Chan, Wiley Interdiscip. Rev.: Comput. Mol. Sci. 8, e1340 (2018).
2“Python-based
Simulations
of
Chemistry
Framework,”
(2020),
https://github.com/pyscf/pyscf (Accessed 16 Apr 2020).
3“PySCF: Python-based Simulations of Chemistry Framework,” (2020),
https://pypi.org/project/pyscf (Accessed 16 Apr 2020).
4“Python-based
Simulations
of
Chemistry
Framework,”
(2020),
https://anaconda.org/pyscf/pyscf (Accessed 16 Apr 2020).
5G. Chen, P. Chen, C.-Y. Hsieh, C.-K. Lee, B. Liao, R. Liao, W. Liu, J. Qiu,
Q. Sun, J. Tang, R. Zemel,
and S. Zhang,
(2019), arXiv:1906.09427
[cs.LG].
6C. Lu, Q. Liu, Q. Sun, C.-Y. Hsieh, S. Zhang, L. Shi, and C.-K. Lee,
(2019), arXiv:1910.13551 [physics.chem-ph].
7S. Dick and M. Fernandez-Serra, (2019), 10.26434/chemrxiv.9947312,
DOI: 10.26434/chemrxiv.9947312.
8H. Ji and Y. Jung, J. Chem. Phys. 148, 241742 (2018).
9J. Hermann, Z. Schätzle,
and F. Noé,
(2019), arXiv:1909.08423
[physics.comp-ph].
10J. Han, L. Zhang, and W. E, J. Comput. Phys. 399, 108929 (2019).
11J. Cartus, https://github.com/jcartus/SCFInitialGuess (Accessed 21 Feb
2020).
12D. Pfau, J. S. Spencer, A. G. d. G. Matthews, and W. M. C. Foulkes,
(2019), arXiv:1909.02487 [physics.chem-ph], arXiv:1909.02487.
13K. Choo, A. Mezzacapo,
and G. Carleo,
(2019), arXiv:1909.12852
[physics.comp-ph], arXiv:1909.12852.
14J. R. McClean, K. J. Sung, I. D. Kivlichan, Y. Cao, C. Dai, E. S. Fried,
C. Gidney, B. Gimby, P. Gokhale, T. Häner, T. Hardikar, V. Havlíˇcek,
O. Higgott, C. Huang, J. Izaac, Z. Jiang, X. Liu, S. McArdle, M. Neeley,
T. O’Brien, B. O’Gorman, I. Ozﬁdan, M. D. Radin, J. Romero, N. Rubin,
N. P. D. Sawaya, K. Setia, S. Sim, D. S. Steiger, M. Steudtner, Q. Sun,
W. Sun, D. Wang, F. Zhang, and R. Babbush, (2017), arXiv:1710.07629
[quant-ph].
15H. Abraham, I. Y. Akhalwaya, G. Aleksandrowicz, T. Alexander,
G. Alexandrowics, E. Arbel, A. Asfaw, C. Azaustre, AzizNgoueya,
P. Barkoutsos, G. Barron, L. Bello, Y. Ben-Haim, D. Bevenius, L. S.
Bishop, S. Bosch, S. Bravyi, D. Bucher, F. Cabrera, P. Calpin, L. Capel-
luto, J. Carballo, G. Carrascal, A. Chen, C.-F. Chen, R. Chen, J. M. Chow,
C. Claus, C. Clauss, A. J. Cross, A. W. Cross, S. Cross, J. Cruz-Benito,
C. Culver, A. D. Córcoles-Gonzales, S. Dague, T. E. Dandachi, M. Darti-
ailh, DavideFrr, A. R. Davila, D. Ding, J. Doi, E. Drechsler, Drew, E. Du-
mitrescu, K. Dumon, I. Duran, K. EL-Safty, E. Eastman, P. Eendebak,
D. Egger, M. Everitt, P. M. Fernández, A. H. Ferrera, A. Frisch, A. Fuhrer,
M. GEORGE, J. Gacon, Gadi, B. G. Gago, J. M. Gambetta, A. Gamman-
pila, L. Garcia, S. Garion, J. Gomez-Mosquera, S. de la Puente González,
I. Gould, D. Greenberg, D. Grinko, W. Guan, J. A. Gunnels, I. Haide,
I. Hamamura, V. Havlicek, J. Hellmers, Ł. Herok, S. Hillmich, H. Horii,
C. Howington, S. Hu, W. Hu, H. Imai, T. Imamichi, K. Ishizaki, R. Iten,
T. Itoko, A. Javadi-Abhari, Jessica, K. Johns, T. Kachmann, N. Kanazawa,
Kang-Bae, A. Karazeev, P. Kassebaum, S. King, Knabberjoe, A. Kovyr-
shin, V. Krishnan, K. Krsulich, G. Kus, R. LaRose, R. Lambert, J. La-
tone, S. Lawrence, D. Liu, P. Liu, Y. Maeng, A. Malyshev, J. Mare-
cek, M. Marques, D. Mathews, A. Matsuo, D. T. McClure, C. McGarry,
D. McKay, S. Meesala, M. Mevissen, A. Mezzacapo, R. Midha, Z. Minev,
N. Moll, M. D. Mooring, R. Morales, N. Moran, P. Murali, J. Müggen-
burg, D. Nadlinger, G. Nannicini, P. Nation, Y. Naveh, P. Neuweiler,
P. Niroula, H. Norlen, L. J. O’Riordan, O. Ogunbayo, P. Ollitrault, S. Oud,
D. Padilha, H. Paik, S. Perriello, A. Phan, M. Pistoia, A. Pozas-iKerstjens,
V. Prutyanov, D. Puzzuoli, J. Pérez, Quintiii, R. Raymond, R. M.-C. Re-
dondo, M. Reuter, J. Rice, D. M. Rodríguez, M. Rossmannek, M. Ryu,
T. SAPV, SamFerracin, M. Sandberg, N. Sathaye, B. Schmitt, C. Schn-
abel, Z. Schoenfeld, T. L. Scholten, E. Schoute, I. F. Sertage, K. Setia,
N. Shammah, Y. Shi, A. Silva, A. Simonetto, N. Singstock, Y. Siraichi,
I. Sitdikov, S. Sivarajah, M. B. Sletfjerding, J. A. Smolin, M. Soeken, I. O.
Sokolov, D. Steenken, M. Stypulkoski, H. Takahashi, I. Tavernelli, C. Tay-
lor, P. Taylour, S. Thomas, M. Tillet, M. Tod, E. de la Torre, K. Trabing,
M. Treinish, TrishaPe, W. Turner, Y. Vaknin, C. R. Valcarce, F. Varchon,
A. C. Vazquez, D. Vogt-Lee, C. Vuillot, J. Weaver, R. Wieczorek, J. A.
Wildstrom, R. Wille, E. Winston, J. J. Woehr, S. Woerner, R. Woo, C. J.
Wood, R. Wood, S. Wood, J. Wootton, D. Yeralin, R. Young, J. Yu, C. Za-
chow, L. Zdanski, C. Zoufal, Zoufalc, azulehner, bcamorrison, brandhsn,
chlorophyll zz, dime10, drholmie, elfrocampeador, faisaldebouni, fanizza-
marco, gruu, kanejess, klinvill, kurarrr, lerongil, ma5x, merav aharoni, or-
dmoj, sethmerkel, strickroman, sumitpuri, tigerjack, toural, vvilpas, will-
hbang, yang.luh, and yotamvakninibm, “Qiskit: An open-source frame-
work for quantum computing,” (2019), DOI: 10.5281/zenodo.2562110.
16T. Yamazaki, S. Matsuura, A. Narimani, A. Saidmuradov, and A. Zarib-
aﬁyan, (2018), arXiv:1806.01305 [quant-ph].
17“PySCF: the Python-based Simulations of Chemistry Framework,”
(2020), http://pyscf.org (Accessed 16 Apr 2020).
18M. Valiev, E. Bylaska, N. Govind, K. Kowalski, T. Straatsma, H. Van Dam,
D. Wang, J. Nieplocha, E. Apra, T. Windus, and W. de Jong, Comput.
Phys. Commun. 181, 1477 (2010).
19F. Furche, R. Ahlrichs, C. Hättig, W. Klopper, M. Sierka, and F. Weigend,
Wiley Interdiscip. Rev.: Comput. Mol. Sci. 4, 91 (2014).
20Y. Shao, Z. Gan, E. Epifanovsky, A. T. Gilbert, M. Wormit, J. Kussmann,
A. W. Lange, A. Behn, J. Deng, X. Feng, D. Ghosh, M. Goldey, P. R. Horn,
L. D. Jacobson, I. Kaliman, R. Z. Khaliullin, T. Ku´s, A. Landau, J. Liu,
E. I. Proynov, Y. M. Rhee, R. M. Richard, M. A. Rohrdanz, R. P. Steele,
E. J. Sundstrom, H. L. Woodcock, P. M. Zimmerman, D. Zuev, B. Al-
brecht, E. Alguire, B. Austin, G. J. O. Beran, Y. A. Bernard, E. Berquist,
K. Brandhorst, K. B. Bravaya, S. T. Brown, D. Casanova, C.-M. Chang,
Y. Chen, S. H. Chien, K. D. Closser, D. L. Crittenden, M. Dieden-
hofen, R. A. DiStasio, H. Do, A. D. Dutoi, R. G. Edgar, S. Fatehi,
L. Fusti-Molnar, A. Ghysels, A. Golubeva-Zadorozhnaya, J. Gomes,
M. W. Hanson-Heine, P. H. Harbach, A. W. Hauser, E. G. Hohenstein,
Z. C. Holden, T.-C. Jagau, H. Ji, B. Kaduk, K. Khistyaev, J. Kim, J. Kim,
R. A. King, P. Klunzinger, D. Kosenkov, T. Kowalczyk, C. M. Krauter,
K. U. Lao, A. D. Laurent, K. V. Lawler, S. V. Levchenko, C. Y. Lin,
F. Liu, E. Livshits, R. C. Lochan, A. Luenser, P. Manohar, S. F. Manzer,
S.-P. Mao, N. Mardirossian, A. V. Marenich, S. A. Maurer, N. J. Mayhall,
E. Neuscamman, C. M. Oana, R. Olivares-Amaya, D. P. O’Neill, J. A.
Parkhill, T. M. Perrine, R. Peverati, A. Prociuk, D. R. Rehn, E. Rosta, N. J.
Russ, S. M. Sharada, S. Sharma, D. W. Small, A. Sodt, T. Stein, D. Stück,
Y.-C. Su, A. J. Thom, T. Tsuchimochi, V. Vanovschi, L. Vogt, O. Vydrov,
T. Wang, M. A. Watson, J. Wenzel, A. White, C. F. Williams, J. Yang,
S. Yeganeh, S. R. Yost, Z.-Q. You, I. Y. Zhang, X. Zhang, Y. Zhao, B. R.
Brooks, G. K. Chan, D. M. Chipman, C. J. Cramer, W. A. Goddard, M. S.
Gordon, W. J. Hehre, A. Klamt, H. F. Schaefer, M. W. Schmidt, C. D. Sher-
rill, D. G. Truhlar, A. Warshel, X. Xu, A. Aspuru-Guzik, R. Baer, A. T.
Bell, N. A. Besley, J.-D. Chai, A. Dreuw, B. D. Dunietz, T. R. Furlani,
S. R. Gwaltney, C.-P. Hsu, Y. Jung, J. Kong, D. S. Lambrecht, W. Liang,
C. Ochsenfeld, V. A. Rassolov, L. V. Slipchenko, J. E. Subotnik, T. Van
Voorhis, J. M. Herbert, A. I. Krylov, P. M. Gill, and M. Head-Gordon,
Mol. Phys. 113, 184 (2015).
21R. M. Parrish, L. A. Burns, D. G. Smith, A. C. Simmonett, A. E. De-
Prince, E. G. Hohenstein, U. Bozkaya, A. Y. Sokolov, R. Di Remigio,

19
R. M. Richard, J. F. Gonthier, A. M. James, H. R. McAlexander, A. Ku-
mar, M. Saitow, X. Wang, B. P. Pritchard, P. Verma, H. F. Schaefer,
K. Patkowski, R. A. King, E. F. Valeev, F. A. Evangelista, J. M. Turney,
T. D. Crawford, and C. D. Sherrill, J. Chem. Theory Comput. 13, 3185
(2017).
22G. Kresse and J. Furthmüller, Phys. Rev. B 54, 11169 (1996).
23G. Kresse and D. Joubert, Phys. Rev. B 59, 1758 (1999).
24J. Enkovaara, C. Rostgaard, J. J. Mortensen, J. Chen, M. Dułak, L. Fer-
righi, J. Gavnholt, C. Glinsvad, V. Haikola, H. A. Hansen, H. H. Kristof-
fersen, M. Kuisma, A. H. Larsen, L. Lehtovaara, M. Ljungberg, O. Lopez-
Acevedo, P. G. Moses, J. Ojanen, T. Olsen, V. Petzold, N. A. Romero,
J. Stausholm-Møller, M. Strange, G. A. Tritsaris, M. Vanin, M. Wal-
ter, B. Hammer, H. Häkkinen, G. K. H. Madsen, R. M. Nieminen, J. K.
Nørskov, M. Puska, T. T. Rantala, J. Schiøtz, K. S. Thygesen, and K. W.
Jacobsen, J. Phys. Condens. Matter 22, 253202 (2010).
25P. Giannozzi, O. Andreussi, T. Brumme, O. Bunau, M. Buongiorno
Nardelli, M. Calandra, R. Car, C. Cavazzoni, D. Ceresoli, M. Cococ-
cioni, N. Colonna, I. Carnimeo, A. Dal Corso, S. de Gironcoli, P. Delugas,
R. A. DiStasio, A. Ferretti, A. Floris, G. Fratesi, G. Fugallo, R. Gebauer,
U. Gerstmann, F. Giustino, T. Gorni, J. Jia, M. Kawamura, H.-Y. Ko,
A. Kokalj, E. Küçükbenli, M. Lazzeri, M. Marsili, N. Marzari, F. Mauri,
N. L. Nguyen, H.-V. Nguyen, A. Otero-de-la Roza, L. Paulatto, S. Poncé,
D. Rocca, R. Sabatini, B. Santra, M. Schlipf, A. P. Seitsonen, A. Smo-
gunov, I. Timrov, T. Thonhauser, P. Umari, N. Vast, X. Wu, and S. Baroni,
J. Phys. Condens. Matter 29, 465901 (2017).
26J. VandeVondele, M. Krack, F. Mohamed, M. Parrinello, T. Chassaing,
and J. Hutter, Comput. Phys. Commun. 167, 103 (2005).
27J. McClain, Q. Sun, G. K.-L. Chan, and T. C. Berkelbach, J. Chem. Theory
Comput. 13, 1209 (2017).
28Q. Sun, T. C. Berkelbach, J. D. McClain, and G. K.-L. Chan, J. Chem.
Phys. 147, 164119 (2017).
29S. Sharma and G. K.-L. Chan, J. Chem. Phys. 136, 124121 (2012).
30S. Wouters, W. Poelmans, P. W. Ayers, and D. Van Neck, Comput. Phys.
Commun. 185, 1501 (2014).
31S. Sharma, A. A. Holmes, G. Jeanmairet, A. Alavi, and C. J. Umrigar, J.
Chem. Theory Comput. 13, 1595 (2017).
32J. E. T. Smith, B. Mussard, A. A. Holmes, and S. Sharma, J. Chem. Theory
Comput. 13, 5468 (2017).
33A. A. Holmes, N. M. Tubman, and C. J. Umrigar, J. Chem. Theory Com-
put. 12, 3674 (2016).
34J. Li, M. Otten, A. A. Holmes, S. Sharma, and C. J. Umrigar, J. Chem.
Phys. 149, 214110 (2018).
35G. H. Booth, S. D. Smart, and A. Alavi, Mol. Phys. 112, 1855 (2014).
36U. Bozkaya, J. M. Turney, Y. Yamaguchi, H. F. Schaefer, and C. D. Sher-
rill, J. Chem. Phys. 135, 104103 (2011).
37R. Seeger and J. A. Pople, J. Chem. Phys. 66, 3045 (1977).
38C. Van Wüllen, J. Comput. Chem. 23, 779 (2002).
39S. Lehtola, C. Steigemann, M. J. Oliveira, and M. A. Marques, SoftwareX
7, 1 (2018).
40U. Ekström, L. Visscher, R. Bast, A. J. Thorvaldsen,
and K. Ruud, J.
Chem. Theory Comput. 6, 1971 (2010).
41O. A. Vydrov and T. Van Voorhis, J. Chem. Phys. 133, 244103 (2010).
42Q. Sun, J. Comput. Chem. 36, 1664 (2015).
43R. A. Friesner, Chem. Phys. Lett. 116, 39 (1985).
44F. Neese, F. Wennmohs, A. Hansen, and U. Becker, Chem. Phys. 356, 98
(2009).
45R. Izsák and F. Neese, J. Chem. Phys. 135, 144105 (2011).
46S. Goedecker, M. Teter, and J. Hutter, Phys. Rev. B 54, 1703 (1996).
47J. Hutter, M. Iannuzzi, F. Schiffmann, and J. VandeVondele, Wiley Inter-
discip. Rev.: Comput. Mol. Sci. 4, 15 (2014).
48C. Angeli, R. Cimiraglia, S. Evangelisti, T. Leininger, and J. P. Malrieu,
J. Chem. Phys. 114, 10252 (2001).
49S. Guo, M. A. Watson, W. Hu, Q. Sun, and G. K.-L. Chan, J. Chem.
Theory Comput. 12, 1583 (2016).
50S. R. Langhoff and E. R. Davidson, Int. J. Quantum Chem. 8, 61 (1974).
51J. A. Pople, R. Seeger, and R. Krishnan, Int. J. Quantum Chem. 12, 149
(1977).
52P. Knowles and N. Handy, Chem. Phys. Lett. 111, 315 (1984).
53J. Olsen, P. Jørgensen, and J. Simons, Chem. Phys. Lett. 169, 463 (1990).
54H. Sekino and R. J. Bartlett, Int. J. Quantum Chem. 26, 255 (1984).
55A. C. Scheiner, G. E. Scuseria, J. E. Rice, T. J. Lee, and H. F. Schaefer, J.
Chem. Phys. 87, 5361 (1987).
56G. E. Scuseria, C. L. Janssen, and H. F. Schaefer, J. Chem. Phys. 89, 7382
(1988).
57K. Raghavachari, G. W. Trucks, J. A. Pople, and M. Head-Gordon, Chem.
Phys. Lett. 157, 479 (1989).
58E. A. Salter, G. W. Trucks, and R. J. Bartlett, J. Chem. Phys. 90, 1752
(1989).
59G. E. Scuseria, J. Chem. Phys. 94, 442 (1991).
60M. Nooijen and R. J. Bartlett, J. Chem. Phys. 102, 3629 (1995).
61H. Koch, A. S. De Merás, T. Helgaker, and O. Christiansen, J. Chem.
Phys. 104, 4157 (1996).
62M. Musial, S. A. Kucharski, and R. J. Bartlett, J. Chem. Phys. 118, 1128
(2003).
63A. I. Krylov, Acc. Chem. Res. 39, 83 (2006).
64H. J. Werner and P. J. Knowles, J. Chem. Phys. 82, 5053 (1985).
65H. J. A. Jensen, P. Jørgensen,
and H. Ågren, J. Chem. Phys. 87, 451
(1987).
66J. Schirmer, Phys. Rev. A 26, 2395 (1982).
67J. Schirmer, L. S. Cederbaum,
and O. Walter, Phys. Rev. A 28, 1237
(1983).
68J. Schirmer and A. B. Troﬁmov, J. Chem. Phys. 120, 11449 (2004).
69A. Dreuw and M. Wormit, Wiley Interdiscip. Rev.: Comput. Mol. Sci. 5,
82 (2015).
70S. Banerjee and A. Y. Sokolov, J. Chem. Phys. 151, 224112 (2019).
71L. Hedin, Phys. Rev. 139, A796 (1965).
72F. Aryasetiawan and O. Gunnarsson, Reports Prog. Phys. 61, 237 (1998),
arXiv:9712013 [cond-mat].
73X. Ren, P. Rinke, V. Blum, J. Wieferink, A. Tkatchenko, A. Sanﬁlippo,
K. Reuter,
and M. Schefﬂer, New J. Phys. 14 (2012), 10.1088/1367-
2630/14/5/053020, arXiv:1201.0655.
74J. Wilhelm, M. Del Ben, and J. Hutter, J. Chem. Theory Comput. 12, 3623
(2016).
75J. F. Stanton and J. Gauss, Theor. Chem. Acc. 93, 303 (1996).
76J. C. Saeh and J. F. Stanton, J. Chem. Phys. 111, 8275 (1999).
77M. Motta, D. M. Ceperley, G. K.-L. Chan, J. A. Gomez, E. Gull, S. Guo,
C. A. Jiménez-Hoyos, T. N. Lan, J. Li, F. Ma, A. J. Millis, N. V. Prokof’ev,
U. Ray, G. E. Scuseria, S. Sorella, E. M. Stoudenmire, Q. Sun, I. S. Tupit-
syn, S. R. White, D. Zgid, and S. Zhang, Phys. Rev. X 7, 031059 (2017).
78Q. Sun, J. Yang, and G. K.-L. Chan, Chem. Phys. Lett. 683, 291 (2017).
79R. E. Thomas, Q. Sun, A. Alavi, and G. H. Booth, J. Chem. Theory Com-
put. 11, 5316 (2015).
80X. Wang and T. C. Berkelbach, (2020), arXiv:2001.11050 [cond-mat.mtrl-
sci], arXiv:2001.11050.
81Y. Gao, Q. Sun, J. M. Yu, M. Motta, J. McClain, A. F. White, A. J. Min-
nich, and G. K.-L. Chan, (2019), arXiv:1910.02191 [cond-mat.mtrl-sci],
arXiv:1910.02191.
82S. H. Vosko, L. Wilk, and M. Nusair, Can. J. Phys. 58, 1200 (1980).
83J. P. Perdew, K. Burke,
and M. Ernzerhof, Phys. Rev. Lett. 77, 3865
(1996), arXiv:0927-0256(96)00008 [10.1016].
84L. Visscher, T. Enevoldsen, T. Saue, H. J. A. Jensen, and J. Oddershede,
J. Comput. Chem. 20, 1262 (1999).
85T. Helgaker, M. Jaszu´nski, and K. Ruud, Chem. Rev. 99, 293 (1999).
86T. Enevoldsen, L. Visscher, T. Saue, H. J. A. Jensen, and J. Oddershede,
J. Chem. Phys. 112, 3493 (2000).
87V. Sychrovský, J. Gräfenstein, and D. Cremer, J. Chem. Phys. 113, 3530
(2000).
88T. Helgaker, M. Watson,
and N. C. Handy, J. Chem. Phys. 113, 9402
(2000).
89L. Cheng, Y. Xiao, and W. Liu, J. Chem. Phys. 130, 144102 (2009).
90G. Schreckenbach and T. Ziegler, J. Phys. Chem. A 101, 3388 (1997).
91F. Neese, J. Chem. Phys. 115, 11080 (2001).
92Z. Rinkevicius, L. Telyatnyk, P. Salek, O. Vahtras, and H. Ågren, J. Chem.
Phys. 119, 10489 (2003).
93P. Hrobárik, M. Repiský, S. Komorovský, V. Hrobáriková, and M. Kaupp,
Theor. Chem. Acc. 129, 715 (2011).
94S. P. Sauer, J. Oddershede, and J. Geertsen, Mol. Phys. 76, 445 (1992).
95J. Gauss, K. Ruud, and T. Helgaker, J. Chem. Phys. 105, 2804 (1996).
96F. Neese, J. Chem. Phys. 118, 3939 (2003).

20
97A. V. Arbuznikov, J. Vaara, and M. Kaupp, J. Chem. Phys. 120, 2127
(2004).
98R. Curl, Mol. Phys. 9, 585 (1965).
99G. Tarczay, P. G. Szalay, and J. Gauss, J. Phys. Chem. A 114, 9246 (2010).
100T. A. Keith, Chem. Phys. 213, 123 (1996).
101R. Cammi, J. Chem. Phys. 109, 3185 (1998).
102M. R. Pederson and S. N. Khanna, Phys. Rev. B 60, 9566 (1999).
103F. Neese, J. Chem. Phys. 127, 164112 (2007).
104S. Schmitt, P. Jost, and C. van Wüllen, J. Chem. Phys. 134, 194113 (2011).
105F. London, J. Phys. le Radium 8, 397 (1937).
106R. Ditchﬁeld, Mol. Phys. 27, 789 (1974).
107H. M. Petrilli, P. E. Blöchl, P. Blaha, and K. Schwarz, Phys. Rev. B 57,
14690 (1998).
108S. Adiga, D. Aebi, and D. L. Bryce, Can. J. Chem. 85, 496 (2007).
109J. Autschbach, S. Zheng, and R. W. Schurko, Concepts Magn. Reson. Part
A 36A, 84 (2010).
110K. G. Dyall, J. Chem. Phys. 106, 9618 (1997).
111W. Kutzelnigg and W. Liu, J. Chem. Phys. 123, 241102 (2005).
112W. Liu and D. Peng, J. Chem. Phys. 125, 044102 (2006).
113M. Iliaš and T. Saue, J. Chem. Phys. 126, 064102 (2007).
114L. Cheng and J. Gauss, J. Chem. Phys. 134, 244112 (2011).
115G. Knizia, J. Chem. Theory Comput. 9, 4834 (2013).
116A. E. Reed, R. B. Weinstock, and F. Weinhold, J. Chem. Phys. 83, 735
(1985).
117Q. Sun and G. K.-L. Chan, J. Chem. Theory Comput. 10, 3784 (2014).
118J. M. Foster and S. F. Boys, Rev. Mod. Phys. 32, 300 (1960).
119C. Edmiston and K. Ruedenberg, J. Chem. Phys. 43, S97 (1965).
120J. Pipek and P. G. Mezey, J. Chem. Phys. 90, 4916 (1989).
121W. D. Derricotte and F. A. Evangelista, J. Chem. Theory Comput. 13, 5984
(2017).
122Q. Sun, (2016), arXiv:1610.08423 [physics.chem-ph].
123G. Pizzi, V. Vitale, R. Arita, S. Blügel, F. Freimuth, G. Géranton, M. Giber-
tini, D. Gresch, C. Johnson, T. Koretsune, J. Ibañez-Azpiroz, H. Lee, J.-M.
Lihm, D. Marchand, A. Marrazzo, Y. Mokrousov, J. I. Mustafa, Y. No-
hara, Y. Nomura, L. Paulatto, S. Poncé, T. Ponweiser, J. Qiao, F. Thöle,
S. S. Tsirkin, M. Wierzbowska, N. Marzari, D. Vanderbilt, I. Souza, A. A.
Mostoﬁ, and J. R. Yates, J. Phys. Condens. Matter 32, 165902 (2020).
124A. Damle, L. Lin, and L. Ying, J. Chem. Theory Comput. 11, 1463 (2015).
125A. Damle, L. Lin, and L. Ying, J. Comput. Phys. 334, 1 (2017).
126A. Klamt and G. Schüürmann, J. Chem. Soc., Perkin Trans. 2 , 799 (1993).
127E. Cancès, B. Mennucci, and J. Tomasi, J. Chem. Phys. 107, 3032 (1997).
128B. Mennucci, E. Cancès, and J. Tomasi, J. Phys. Chem. B 101, 10506
(1997).
129E. Cancès, Y. Maday, and B. Stamm, J. Chem. Phys. 139, 054111 (2013).
130F. Lipparini, B. Stamm, E. Cancès, Y. Maday, and B. Mennucci, J. Chem.
Theory Comput. 9, 3637 (2013).
131F. Lipparini, G. Scalmani, L. Lagardère, B. Stamm, E. Cancès, Y. Maday,
J.-P. Piquemal, M. J. Frisch, and B. Mennucci, J. Chem. Phys. 141, 184108
(2014).
132B. Stamm, E. Cancès, F. Lipparini, and Y. Maday, J. Chem. Phys. 144,
054101 (2016).
133F. Lipparini and B. Mennucci, J. Chem. Phys. 144, 160901 (2016).
134Z. Li, S. Guo, Q. Sun, and G. K.-L. Chan, Nat. Chem. 11, 1026 (2019).
135M. Scheurer, P. Reinholdt, E. R. Kjellgren, J. M. Haugaard Olsen,
A. Dreuw, and J. Kongsted, J. Chem. Theory Comput. 15, 6154 (2019).
136M. Scheurer, “CPPE: C++ and Python Library for Polarizable Embed-
ding,” (2019), DOI: 10.5281/zenodo.3345696.
137W. Liu and D. Peng, J. Chem. Phys. 131, 031104 (2009).
138R. Flores-Moreno, R. J. Alvarez-Mendez, A. Vela, and A. M. Köster, J.
Comput. Chem. 27, 1009 (2006).
139B. Mussard and S. Sharma, J. Chem. Theory Comput. 14, 154 (2018).
140L.-P. Wang and C. Song, J. Chem. Phys. 144, 214108 (2016).
141J. Hermann, “Pyberny,” (2020), DOI: 10.5281/zenodo.3695038.
142S. Grimme, J. Antony, S. Ehrlich,
and H. Krieg, J. Chem. Phys. 132,
154104 (2010).
143J.
L.
C.
Sainz,
“A
python
wrapper
for
DFT-D3,”
https://github.com/cuanto/libdftd3 (Accessed 21 Feb 2020).
144D. A. Matthews, (2016), arXiv:1607.00291 [cs.MS], arXiv:1607.00291.
145J. Huang, D. A. Matthews,
and R. A. van de Geijn,
(2017),
arXiv:1704.03092 [cs.MS], arXiv:1704.03092.
146D. Matthews, “TBLIS is a library and framework for performing tensor op-
erations, especially tensor contraction, using efﬁcient native algorithms,”
https://github.com/devinamatthews/tblis (Accessed 21 Feb 2020).
147J. Kim, A. D. Baczewski, T. D. Beaudet, A. Benali, M. C. Bennett, M. A.
Berrill, N. S. Blunt, E. J. L. Borda, M. Casula, D. M. Ceperley, S. Chiesa,
B. K. Clark, R. C. Clay, K. T. Delaney, M. Dewing, K. P. Esler, H. Hao,
O. Heinonen, P. R. C. Kent, J. T. Krogel, I. Kylänpää, Y. W. Li, M. G.
Lopez, Y. Luo, F. D. Malone, R. M. Martin, A. Mathuriya, J. McMinis,
C. A. Melton, L. Mitas, M. A. Morales, E. Neuscamman, W. D. Parker,
S. D. Pineda Flores, N. A. Romero, B. M. Rubenstein, J. A. R. Shea,
H. Shin, L. Shulenburger, A. F. Tillack, J. P. Townsend, N. M. Tubman,
B. Van Der Goetz, J. E. Vincent, D. C. Yang, Y. Yang, S. Zhang, and
L. Zhao, J. Phys. Condens. Matter 30, 195901 (2018).
148L. K. Wagner, K. Williams, S. Pathak, B. Busemeyer, J. N. B. Rodrigues,
Y. Chang, A. Munoz, and C. Lorsung, “Python library for real space quan-
tum Monte Carlo,” https://github.com/WagnerGroup/pyqmc (Accessed 21
Feb 2020).
149L. K. Wagner, M. Bajdich, and L. Mitas, J. Comput. Phys. 228, 3390
(2009).
150J. S. Spencer, N. S. Blunt, S. Choi, J. Etrych, M. A. Filip, W. M. Foulkes,
R. S. Franklin, W. J. Handley, F. D. Malone, V. A. Neufeld, R. Di Remigio,
T. W. Rogers, C. J. Scott, J. J. Shepherd, W. A. Vigor, J. Weston, R. Q. Xu,
and A. J. Thom, J. Chem. Theory Comput. 15, 1728 (2019).
151D. V. Chulhai and J. D. Goodpaster, J. Chem. Theory Comput. 13, 1503
(2017).
152H. R. Petras, D. S. Graham, S. K. Ramadugu, J. D. Goodpaster, and J. J.
Shepherd, J. Chem. Theory Comput. 15, 5332 (2019).
153J. D. Goodpaster, D. S. Graham, and D. V. Chulhai, “Goodpaster/QSoME:
Initial Release,” (2019), DOI: 10.5281/zenodo.3356913.
154M. R. Hermes and L. Gagliardi, J. Chem. Theory Comput. 15, 972 (2019).
155H. Q. Pham, M. R. Hermes, and L. Gagliardi, J. Chem. Theory Comput.
16, 130 (2020).
156X. Zhang and E. A. Carter, J. Chem. Theory Comput. 15, 949 (2019).
157Z.-H. Cui, T. Zhu, and G. K.-L. Chan, J. Chem. Theory Comput. 16, 119
(2019).
158T. Zhu, Z. H. Cui, and G. K.-L. Chan, J. Chem. Theory Comput. 16, 141
(2020).
159L. Gagliardi, D. G. Truhlar, G. Li Manni, R. K. Carlson, C. E. Hoyer, and
J. L. Bao, Acc. Chem. Res. 50, 66 (2017).
160J. J. Eriksen, “PyMBE: A Many-Body Expanded Correlation Code by
Janus Juul Eriksen,” Https://gitlab.com/januseriksen/pymbe (Accessed 21
Feb 2020).
161J. J. Eriksen, F. Lipparini, and J. Gauss, J. Phys. Chem. Lett. 8, 4633
(2017), arXiv:1708.02103.
162J. J. Eriksen and J. Gauss, J. Chem. Theory Comput. 14, 5180 (2018),
arXiv:1807.01328.
163J. J. Eriksen and J. Gauss, J. Chem. Theory Comput. 15, 4873 (2019),
arXiv:1905.02786.
164J. J. Eriksen and J. Gauss, J. Phys. Chem. Lett. 10, 7910 (2019),
arXiv:1910.03527.
165S. Iskakov, A. A. Rusakov, D. Zgid, and E. Gull, Phys. Rev. B 100, 085112
(2019).
166W. Li, C. Chen, D. Zhao, and S. Li, Int. J. Quantum Chem. 115, 641
(2015).
167W. Li, Z. Ni, and S. Li, Mol. Phys. 114, 1447 (2016).
168G. F. von Rudorff and O. A. von Lilienfeld, (2018), arXiv:1809.01647
[physics.chem-ph].
169G. F. Von Rudorff and O. A. Von Lilienfeld, J. Phys. Chem. B 123, 10073
(2019).
170P. Koval, M. Barbry, and D. Sánchez-Portal, Comput. Phys. Commun.
236, 188 (2019).
171S. Schwalbe, L. Fiedler, T. Hahn, K. Trepte, J. Kraus, and J. Kortus,
(2019), arXiv:1905.02631 [physics.comp-ph].
172M. F. Herbst, A. Dreuw, and J. E. Avery, J. Chem. Phys. 149, 084106
(2018).
173Z. Rinkevicius,
X. Li,
O. Vahtras,
K. Ahmadzadeh,
M. Brand,
M. Ringholm, N. H. List, M. Scheurer, M. Scott, A. Dreuw, and P. Nor-
man, Wiley Interdiscip. Rev.: Comput. Mol. Sci. , e1457 (2019), DOI:
10.1002/wcms.1457.

21
174M. F. Herbst, M. Scheurer, T. Fransson, D. R. Rehn,
and A. Dreuw,
Wiley Interdiscip. Rev.:
Comput. Mol. Sci. , e1462 (2020), DOI:
10.1002/wcms.1462.
