1 
 
High-throughput molecular imaging via deep learning 
enabled Raman spectroscopy 
Conor C. Horgan1,5, Magnus Jensen1, Anika Nagelkerke2, Jean-Phillipe St-Pierre3, Tom Vercauteren4, Molly 
M. Stevens5*, Mads S. Bergholt1* 
1Centre for Craniofacial and Regenerative Biology, King’s College London, London SE1 9RT, UK 
2University of Groningen, Groningen Research Institute of Pharmacy, Pharmaceutical Analysis, P.O. Box 196, XB20, 9700 AD Gro-
ningen, The Netherlands 
3Department of Chemical and Biological Engineering, University of Ottawa, Ottawa, ON K1N 6N5, Canada 
4School of Biomedical Engineering and Imaging Sciences, King's College London, WC2R 2LS, UK 
5Department of Materials, Department of Bioengineering, and Institute of Biomedical Engineering, Imperial College London, London 
SW7 2AZ, UK 
*Corresponding authors: mads.bergholt@kcl.ac.uk, m.stevens@imperial.ac.uk 
 
Abstract 
Raman spectroscopy enables non-destructive, label-free imaging with unprecedented molecular contrast but is 
limited by slow data acquisition, largely preventing high-throughput imaging applications. Here, we present a 
comprehensive framework for higher-throughput molecular imaging via deep learning enabled Raman spec-
troscopy, termed DeepeR, trained on a large dataset of hyperspectral Raman images, with over 1.5 million 
spectra (400 hours of acquisition) in total. We firstly perform denoising and reconstruction of low signal-to-
noise ratio Raman molecular signatures via deep learning, with a 9 improvement in mean squared error over 
state-of-the-art Raman filtering methods. Next, we develop a neural network for robust 2–4 super-resolution 
of hyperspectral Raman images that preserves molecular cellular information. Combining these approaches, 
we achieve Raman imaging speed-ups of up to 160, enabling high resolution, high signal-to-noise ratio cel-
lular imaging in under one minute. Finally, transfer learning is applied to extend DeepeR from cell to tissue-
scale imaging. DeepeR provides a foundation that will enable a host of higher-throughput Raman spectrosco-
py and molecular imaging applications across biomedicine. 
 
Introduction 
Raman spectroscopy has recently excelled as a high-
ly complementary tool for biomedical research 
providing non-destructive, label-free, molecular im-
aging with subcellular resolution. This has enabled a 
multitude of exciting biomedical applications from 
fundamental in vitro cellular studies1,2, to ex vivo 
spectral histopathology3,4, and in vivo fibreoptic en-
doscopy for optical biopsy at the molecular level5,6. 
Despite its many advantages, Raman spectroscopy 
remains limited by the weakness of generated Raman 
signal, which necessitates spectral acquisition times 
on the order of one second per sampled point7. As 
such, high-resolution Raman spectroscopic imaging 
of cells or tissues often requires multiple hours, 
which is prohibitive for high-throughput Raman 
spectroscopic imaging applications8–10. To address 
these acquisition time and signal-to-noise ratio 
(SNR) challenges, advanced nonlinear Raman spec-
troscopy techniques including coherent anti-stokes 
Raman spectroscopy (CARS) and stimulated Raman 
spectroscopy (SRS) have been developed11–13. How-
ever, while these advanced techniques have recently 
enabled rapid broadband Raman imaging in biomed-
icine, they do so through application of pulsed laser 
systems that are technically demanding to operate 
and incur significant costs14. 
A potential alternative, or complement, to hardware-
based solutions lies in deep learning15. Deep learning 
is a subset of machine learning capable of uncover-
ing effective representations of data across multiple 
levels of abstraction and has demonstrated incredible 
results across several domains including image clas-
sification and segmentation, natural language pro-
cessing, and predictive modelling16–19. Recently, the 
application of deep learning to point-based Raman 
spectroscopy has achieved promising results in the 
intraoperative diagnosis of brain tumours and in the 
rapid identification of pathogenic bacteria20,21. While 
such applications are likely to improve Raman spec-
troscopic diagnostic accuracy, even greater benefits 
lie in the potential for deep learning to improve Ra-
man spectroscopic imaging by increasing signal ac-
quisition speeds and enabling high-quality recon-
struction from noisy, low-resolution input data. Hy-
perspectral Raman images, where each pixel contains 
a complete Raman spectrum, represent highly struc-

2 
 
tured data with complex spatial and spectral correla-
tions amenable to deep learning. This highly struc-
tured nature of the data is at present underutilised, 
with existing data processing and analysis techniques 
(e.g. chemometrics and multivariate analysis) failing 
to adequately exploit these complex correlations.  
Deep learning has made significant strides in signal 
reconstruction tasks, most notably for single-image 
super-resolution (SISR)22–24, image denoising25,26, 
and signal denoising27,28. In each of these domains, a 
neural network is trained on pairs of low-quality (e.g. 
low-resolution (LR)) and high-quality (e.g. high-
resolution (HR)) data, attempting to learn effective 
representations of the low-quality inputs that recon-
struct the corresponding high-quality outputs. Neural 
networks can thus be considered to learn prior infor-
mation (e.g. shapes, sizes, colours typical of different 
features) from the corpus of data in the training set in 
order to generate high-quality output data given low-
quality input data in the test set.  
In the context of signal denoising, several groups 
have developed neural networks designed to reduce 
noise in electrocardiograms27,28, while image de-
noising has been employed to improve image quality 
by removing noise generated by imaging hardware or 
compression artefacts26,29. Similarly, much work has 
focused on SISR, with important potential life-
sciences applications already demonstrated for fluo-
rescence microscopy, MRI, electron microscopy, and 
even endomicroscopy30–34. SISR approaches have 
enabled HR fluorescence microscopy with ~100 
lower light dose and 16 higher frame rates for re-
duced photo-bleaching and photo-toxicity32, while 4 
brain MRI super-resolution has achieved shorter scan 
times, increased spatial coverage, and higher signal-
to-noise ratio (SNR)31.  
Here, we present DeepeR, a comprehensive deep 
learning framework for high-throughput molecular 
imaging via deep learning enabled Raman spectros-
copy. We first show, using a dataset consisting of 
172,312 pairs of low and high SNR Raman spectra, 
that deep learning significantly outperforms state-of-
the-art spectral smoothing algorithms 9, enabling 
effective reconstruction of Raman signatures from 
low SNR Raman spectra. We next develop a convo-
lutional neural network for hyperspectral Raman 
image super-resolution, using an additional dataset of 
169 hyperspectral images representing 1.4 million 
Raman spectra (389 hours of acquisition) in total. We 
achieve robust 2–4 super-resolution image recon-
struction, corresponding to a 4–16 reduction in 
imaging time. Then, using a hybrid approach, we 
demonstrate Raman imaging with effective speed-
ups of 40–160 while preserving molecular cellular 
information. Finally, we highlight the generalisability 
of our deep learning framework, employing transfer 
learning to extend our pre-trained neural networks 
from cells to tissues. 
 
Results 
Hyperspectral 
Raman 
Deep 
Learning 
Framework 
DeepeR is designed to improve Raman spectroscopic 
acquisition times towards high-throughput Raman 
imaging applications. Working across hyperspectral 
Raman data, DeepeR performs i) Raman spectral 
denoising, ii) hyperspectral super-resolution, and iii) 
transfer learning (Figure 1). Raman spectral de-
noising is performed using a 1D residual UNet 
(ResUNet)35, which takes low SNR input spectra and 
reconstructs them to produce corresponding high 
SNR output spectra (Figure 1i). Hyperspectral super-
resolution is achieved using an adapted residual 
channel attention network (RCAN)36 to output a HR 
hyperspectral Raman image from a LR input (Figure 
1ii, Supplementary Figure 1). The combination of i) 
Raman spectral denoising and ii) hyperspectral su-
per-resolution then enables significant Raman imag-
ing speed-ups for high-throughput applications. Fi-
nally, DeepeR can be generalised to a wide range of 
Raman imaging applications through transfer learn-
ing, where neural networks pre-trained on large hy-
perspectral datasets can be fine-tuned to operate ef-
fectively on small hyperspectral datasets (Figure 
1iii).  

3 
 
 
Figure 1 | Deep Learning Enabled Raman Hyperspectral Super-Resolution Imaging. The deep learning framework 
DeepeR is designed to operate on hyperspectral Raman images, where high information-content Raman spectra at 
each pixel provide detailed insight into the molecular composition of cells/tissues. To improve the speed of Raman 
spectroscopic imaging and enable high-throughput applications, we first (i) train a 1D ResUNet neural network for Ra-
man spectral denoising to effectively reconstruct a high SNR Raman spectrum (long acquisition time) from a corre-
sponding low SNR input spectrum (short acquisition time). Next, we (ii) train a hyperspectral residual channel attention 
neural network to accurately reconstruct high spatial resolution hyperspectral Raman images from corresponding low 
spatial resolution hyperspectral Raman images to significantly reduce imaging times. Then, by combining (i) and (ii) we 
achieve extreme speed-ups of up to 160 in Raman imaging time while maintaining high reconstruction fidelity. Finally, 
we (iii) demonstrate that transfer learning can be used to take our pre-trained neural networks (trained on large da-
tasets) to operate on an entirely unrelated hyperspectral data domain for which there is only a limited dataset (insuffi-
cient to effectively train a neural network from scratch). 

4 
 
Deep Learning Enabled Raman Denoising 
We first developed a neural network training pipeline 
for Raman denoising – the reconstruction of a Raman 
spectrum with high SNR from a corresponding low 
SNR Raman spectrum. We cultured MDA-MB-231 
breast cancer cells, a widely studied cell line, and 
sequentially acquired low SNR (0.1 second integra-
tion time per spectrum) and high SNR (1 second 
integration time per spectrum) hyperspectral confocal 
Raman cell image pairs (n = 11 cells) using 532 nm 
laser excitation. This resulted in a large dataset con-
sisting of pairs of low and high SNR Raman spectra 
(n = 172,312 spectral pairs). Importantly, these Ra-
man spectra contain an abundance of molecular in-
formation, including information about the relative 
concentrations and distributions of various nucleic 
acids, proteins, and lipids1. For instance, intense 
peaks can be seen near 795 cm-1 (DNA), 1004 cm-1 
(phenylalanine), 1300 and 1440 cm-1 (lipids), and 
1660 cm-1 (predominantly Amide I of proteins). Suc-
cessful denoising and reconstruction of low SNR 
Raman spectra requires that this biochemical infor-
mation be effectively preserved.  
We applied a 1D ResUNet to this dataset, performing 
11-fold cross-validation by training 11 independent 
models on training/validation sets composed of all of 
the spectra from 10 hyperspectral Raman cell images, 
where the test sets in each case consisted of all the 
spectra from the remaining hyperspectral Raman cell 
image (see Materials and Methods and Supplemen-
tary Table 1 for full implementation details). The 1D 
ResUNet learned to produce high quality output Ra-
man spectra from low SNR input spectra that strong-
ly aligned with the target (ground truth) high SNR 
spectra (Figure 2). To achieve this, the 1D ResUNet 
operates across multiple feature scales and spectral 
resolutions, learning spectral features (and the mo-
lecular constituents they represent) typical of Raman 
spectra in the training set in order to identify a map-
ping between low SNR inputs and target high SNR 
outputs in the test set. Importantly, the neural net-
work significantly outperformed Savitzky-Golay 
(SG) filtering (assessed via a two-tailed Wilcoxon 
paired signed rank test) across multiple SG filter 
parametrisations, the current state-of-the-art for Ra-
man spectral smoothing37. Application of the neural 
network to the test sets achieved a spectral mean 
squared error (MSE) between output and target spec-
tra that was 9 lower than the best performing SG 
filter, with a mean MSE of 2.85x10-3 [95% confi-
dence interval (CI): 2.55x10-3, 3.15x10-3] for the 1D 
ResUNet and 2.54x10-2 [95% CI: 2.30x10-2, 2.78x10-
2] for the best performing SG filter (Figure 2b). This 
result demonstrates that the 1D ResUNet effectively 
learned the structure of Raman spectra, enabling it to 
discern true signal from background noise far better 
than a naïve SG algorithm (which has no a priori 
knowledge of the typical structures of Raman spec-
tral features). 

5 
 
 
Figure 2 | Deep Learning Enabled Raman Denoising. (a) Exemplar test set pair of low SNR input Raman spectrum (light 
grey) and corresponding high SNR target Raman spectrum (dark grey) as well as the Savitzky-Golay (blue) and neural 
network (red) outputs for the given input spectrum (normalised to maximum peak intensity). (b) Mean squared error 
(performed across all spectral channels and all image pixels) across all test set hyperspectral Raman cell images for raw 
input spectra, 1D ResUNet output spectra, and Savitzky-Golay output spectra (order x, frame width y) with respect to 
corresponding target spectra (n = 11) (error bars: mean ± STD) (two-tailed Wilcoxon  paired signed rank test against 
best performing Savitzky-Golay filter, *** P < 0.005). (c) Exemplar 1450 cm-1 peak intensity heatmaps for low SNR input 
hyperspectral Raman image, Savitzky-Golay (1st order, frame length 9) filtering of input hyperspectral Raman image, 1D 
ResUNet output, and target high SNR hyperspectral Raman image with corresponding imaging times shown in white 
(min:sec) (scale bar = 10 µm). (d) Exemplar vertex component analysis (VCA) performed on target high SNR hyperspec-
tral Raman image identifies 5 key components (proteins/lipids [red], nucleic acids [blue], proteins [green], lipids [yel-
low], and background [black]) which are applied to low SNR input, Savitzky-Golay output, and 1D ResUNet output im-
ages via non-negatively constrained least-squares regression demonstrating that low SNR input and Savitzky-Golay 
output data do not effectively identify different cell components. (e-f) Exemplar Raman spectra (white arrows in (c)) 
corresponding to (e) a lipid-rich cytoplasmic region and (f) the nucleus. 

6 
 
We then examined whether the neural network-based 
Raman spectral reconstruction would result in signif-
icant loss of biochemical information or the introduc-
tion of ‘hallucinated’ spatial or spectral features. To 
do this, we compared the quality of Raman hyper-
spectral images for each hyperspectral Raman cell 
image based on low SNR input data, SG smoothed 
low SNR data, neural network reconstructed data, 
and the ground truth high SNR data (Figure 2c). SG 
filtering produced a spatially blurred image with a 
loss of fine details, as it is performed independently 
for each pixel, while the 1D ResUNet produced a 
much sharper result with improved contrast of bio-
molecular features that closely aligns with the target 
high SNR image, suggesting the preservation of bio-
chemical information. Indeed, the 1D ResUNet sig-
nificantly outperformed SG filtering in terms of two 
commonly used image quality metrics, peak signal-
to-noise ratio (PSNR) and structural similarity index 
(SSIM). While the 1D ResUNet achieved a mean 
PSNR of 46.21 [95% CI: 45.76, 46.67] and a mean 
SSIM of 0.9532 [95% CI: 0.9154, 0.9910] across the 
11 hyperspectral Raman cell images, SG filtering 
resulted in the statistically significantly lower values 
(assessed via a two-tailed Wilcoxon paired signed 
rank test) of 38.53 [95% CI: 37.18, 39.88] and 
0.8325 [95% CI: 0.7434, 0.9216], respectively.  
To assess the preservation of biochemical infor-
mation, we next applied a vertex component analysis 
(VCA) to an exemplar target high SNR hyperspectral 
Raman image (Figure 2d). VCA is a spectral unmix-
ing technique designed for the unsupervised extrac-
tion of endmembers from hyperspectral data, ena-
bling the identification of major constituent compo-
nents in a hyperspectral Raman image (e.g. lipid-rich, 
nucleic-acid rich, background regions)38. The VCA 
endmembers identified for the target high SNR hy-
perspectral Raman image (Supplementary Figure 2) 
were then applied to the input data, the SG output 
data, and the 1D ResUNet output data via non-
negatively constrained least-squares regression. Cru-
cially, this analysis demonstrated that the 1D 
ResUNet output effectively identified and preserved 
key molecular species present in the hyperspectral 
image in line with the target high SNR hyperspectral 
image. In contrast, the SG output failed to robustly 
distinguish the different Raman cellular signatures. 
Exemplar spectra from two different regions (nucleus 
and cytoplasm) of the hyperspectral images (Figure 
2e-f) further demonstrated the superiority of the 1D 
ResUNet output for the accurate reconstruction of 
biochemical information contained in the Raman 
spectra. Importantly, applying the neural network on 
a per-hyperspectral pixel in this manner effectively 
enabled Raman spectroscopic imaging up to 10 
faster than conventional Raman spectroscopy in this 
case, while preserving biochemical information. 
 
Deep Learning Enabled Hyperspectral Image 
Super-Resolution 
While the denoising results demonstrate a significant 
improvement in imaging times for conventional Ra-
man spectroscopic imaging, the 1D ResUNet does 
not consider the high degree of molecular composi-
tional correlation between adjacent pixels. We there-
fore sought to improve this and take spatial context 
into consideration by developing a 2D neural net-
work for hyperspectral Raman image super-
resolution (HyRISR). To achieve this, we trained 
HyRISR to take a LR (high SNR) hyperspectral im-
age as input and output a corresponding HR (high 
SNR) hyperspectral image. HyRISR learns to identi-
fy spatial and spectral correlations present in the 
training set in order to develop an accurate mapping 
between LR inputs and target HR outputs in the test 
set. HyRISR follows a similar architecture to the 
RCAN, with the introduction of spectral downsam-
pling early in the network followed by spectral up-
sampling at the end of the network (Supplementary 
Figure 1). This use of spectral downsampling ex-
ploits the high spectral resolution (and hence high 
channel redundancy) of Raman spectra to reduce the 
computational load of HyRISR without sacrificing 
super-resolution performance. 
We applied HyRISR to a dataset of hyperspectral 
Raman images of MDA-MB-231 breast cancer cells 
(n = 169 Raman images) using a data split of 85:10:5 
for training, validation, and test sets (see Materials 
and Methods and Supplementary Table 2 for full 
implementation details). To increase the effective 
size of our dataset and improve the robustness of 
HyRISR, we employed extensive data augmentation 
including randomly applied image cropping, flipping, 
rotation, and mixup39, as well as randomly applied 
spectral flipping and shifting (Supplementary Figure 
3). To generate LR input images, we downsampled 
corresponding HR images 2, 3, or 4 by keeping 
only every 2nd, 3rd, or 4th pixel (where each pixel of 
the hyperspectral image contains a full Raman spec-
trum) in both x and y to reflect the raster scan nature 
of Raman imaging. Application of HyRISR to the 
test set for 2, 3, and 4 super-resolution yielded 
superior performance, statistically significantly ex-
ceeding standard nearest neighbour and bicubic up-
sampling methods in terms of two image quality 
metrics, PSNR and SSIM, as well as in terms of MSE 
(Figure 3, Supplementary Figures 4-6). Importantly, 
these results, particularly the 2 and 3 super-
resolution images, demonstrated good fidelity to the 

7 
 
corresponding high-resolution target image, accurate-
ly reconstructing spectral features to correctly identi-
fy cellular components via VCA. This, combined 
with the reduced MSE values, demonstrates that the 
neural network can effectively preserve molecular 
information through accurate spectral reconstruction. 
Although at 2 HyRISR produced minimal blurring, 
blur increased significantly at 3 and 4, a well-
known result of training our SISR neural network 
with an L1 loss function (see Discussion for further 
details). Despite this blurring, the HyRISR output 
qualitatively better delineated cell boundaries, cor-
rectly identified subcellular features, and introduced 
fewer artefacts compared to bicubic upsampling.  
 
Figure 3 | Deep learning enabled hyperspectral image super-resolution. (a) 2, 3, and 4 super-resolution of exam-
ple test set hyperspectral Raman image enables a significant reduction in imaging times (shown in white) while recover-
ing important spatial and spectral information (scale bars = 10 µm). Images shown are the result of a VCA performed on 
the target HR hyperspectral Raman image, which identified 5 key components (lipid droplets [magenta], nucleic acids 
[blue], proteins [green], lipids [yellow], and background [black]). VCA components were applied to the nearest neigh-
bour output, bicubic output, and HyRISR output images via non-negatively constrained least-squares regression. (b) 
Exemplar Raman spectrum at white arrow in (a) demonstrating that the neural network output (red) is more closely 
aligned to the target (ground truth) spectrum (dark grey). (c-d) Mean test set (c) PSNR, (d) SSIM, (e) MSE values for 
nearest neighbour upsampling, bicubic upsampling, and HyRISR output for 2, 3, and 4 super-resolution (n = 9) (error 
bars: mean ± STD) (One-way paired analysis of variance (ANOVA) with Geisser-Greenhouse correction and Tukey’s mul-
tiple comparisons test, * P < 0.05, ** P < 0.01, *** P < 0.001). 
 
 
 

8 
 
Notably, as with the denoising 1D ResUNet present-
ed above, HyRISR enabled a significant reduction in 
imaging time, down from 68:15 (min:sec) to 17:03 in 
the case of 2 super-resolution and to 07:20 for 3 
super-resolution. Importantly, this was achieved with 
only a limited loss of high-frequency details, with 
biochemical spectral information well maintained as 
evidenced by VCA (Figure 3a-b). In contrast, bicubic 
upsampling introduced numerous artefacts into the 
hyperspectral image. Although 4 super-resolution 
reduces imaging time further to 04:15, it does so with 
a much greater loss of fine details for both bicubic 
upsampling and HyRISR. While this might not be 
suitable for high-resolution cellular imaging, such 4 
super-resolution Raman imaging could prove useful 
for other applications. 
 
Hybrid Denoising and Super-Resolution Raman 
Spectroscopy for High-Throughput Molecular 
Imaging 
While both our 1D ResUNet Raman spectral de-
noising and HyRISR neural networks enable signifi-
cant speed-ups in Raman imaging time, single cell 
Raman imaging using either network remains on the 
order of minutes. Though this is considerably faster 
than conventional Raman imaging, it remains too 
slow for high-throughput applications such as cell 
imaging or automated spectral histopathology. To 
further improve the speed of Raman image acquisi-
tion, we next combined our two neural networks to 
perform sequential Raman spectral denoising fol-
lowed by hyperspectral image super-resolution. Se-
quential application of the neural networks in this 
manner enabled the use of all data present in each 
dataset (as opposed to the small subset of data pre-
sent in both the denoising and HyRISR datasets). 
Here, using the Raman spectra from a single cell in 
the test set for both datasets, we achieved effective 
speed-ups of 40 (2 super-resolution), 90 (3 su-
per-resolution), and 160 (4 super-resolution) while 
accurately reconstructing a high SNR, HR hyper-
spectral Raman image from a low SNR, LR input 
hyperspectral Raman image (Figure 4, Supplemen-
tary Figure 7). 
 
 

9 
 
 
Figure 4 | Combined Raman spectral denoising and hyperspectral image super-resolution enables extreme speed-ups 
in Raman imaging time. (a) Sequential application of Raman spectral denoising followed by hyperspectral image super-
resolution enables extreme speed-ups in imaging time (shown in white) from 68:15 (min:sec) to 01:42 for 2 super-
resolution, 00:44 for 3 super-resolution, and 00:26 for 4 super-resolution while largely preserving molecular infor-
mation (scale bars = 10 µm). Images shown are the result of a VCA performed on the target HR, high SNR hyperspectral 
Raman image, which identified 4 key components (nucleic acids [blue], proteins [green], lipids [yellow], and background 
[black]). VCA components were applied to input, state-of-the-art output (SG filtering and bicubic upsampling), and 
neural network output images via non-negatively constrained least-squares regression. (b) Pixel classification accuracy 
for input, state-of-the-art output (SG filtering and bicubic upsampling), and neural network output images as compared 
to VCA pixel classification of target HR, high SNR hyperspectral Raman image. 
 
We again used VCA to identify key Raman spectral 
components in our ground truth image and employed 
non-negatively constrained least-squares regression 
to apply the identified VCA endmembers to the input 
images (nearest neighbour rescaled), state-of-the-art 
output images (SG filtering and bicubic upsampling), 
and neural network output images. Our neural net-
works outperformed the combination of SG filtering 
and bicubic upsampling, accurately reconstructing 
both spatial and spectral information and maintaining 
accurate VCA endmember identification (Figure 4a). 
In each case, this resulted in an improved pixel clas-
sification accuracy (as compared to pixel classifica-
tion for the ground truth hyperspectral Raman image, 
determined as the VCA endmember with the maxi-
mum intensity value for each pixel as per non-
negatively constrained least-squares regression) rela-
tive to the inputs and state-of-the-art outputs (Figure 

10 
 
4b). Crucially, accurate spectral and spatial recon-
struction was maintained even for 40 and 90 Ra-
man imaging time speed-ups, enabling HR hyper-
spectral Raman cell imaging in under 2 minutes or 
under 1 minute, respectively. While imaging time 
can be further reduced by employing 4 super-
resolution for a 160 Raman imaging time speed-up, 
reconstructed image quality continues to degrade and 
may produce undesirable artefacts at higher super-
resolution scales. 
 
Generalised Hyperspectral Imaging from Cells to 
Tissues Using Transfer Learning 
Finally, to highlight the generalisability and wide 
applicability of our DeepeR framework, we used 
transfer learning to apply HyRISR to a small dataset 
of hyperspectral Raman images of unrelated origin. 
We thus extended DeepeR to the field of regenerative 
medicine for super-resolution hyperspectral Raman 
imaging of in vitro-formed cartilage constructs. Both 
the spatial and spectral information contained in the 
hyperspectral Raman images of tissue-engineered 
cartilage samples differ significantly from those of 
MDA-MB-231 breast cancer cells used to train 
HyRISR, representing an effective test of the trans-
ferability of DeepeR. While we have already demon-
strated the potential of DeepeR for hyperspectral 
Raman cellular image super-resolution, deep learning 
is a data-heavy approach that requires large, labelled 
datasets in order to be effective. For applications 
where such a large dataset does not exist, data acqui-
sition for deep learning can be prohibitively time-
consuming and expensive. Here, we aimed to 
demonstrate that transfer learning, the application of 
an existing neural network model trained on a large 
dataset to a second, smaller dataset, can achieve high 
quality results (Figure 1 iv). 
To do this, we used a small training dataset consist-
ing of 16 patches (6464 pixels each) from large HR 
Raman hyperspectral images of tissue-engineered 
cartilage, with a separate test set of 12 patches 
(6464 pixels each) from a single tissue-engineered 
cartilage sample. Here, transfer learning was per-
formed by further training all neural network weights 
from a pre-trained HyRISR model for 200 epochs on 
the small tissue-engineered cartilage training dataset. 
We then compared the super-resolution performance 
of this fine-tuned model, against both nearest neigh-
bour and bicubic upsampling as well as against 
HyRISR trained from scratch on the small training 
dataset of hyperspectral Raman tissue-engineered 
cartilage image patches alone (Figure 5, Supplemen-
tary Figure 8). As expected, transfer learning of 
HyRISR achieved superior results to nearest neigh-
bour upsampling, bicubic upsampling, and HyRISR 
trained from scratch on the tissue-engineered carti-
lage dataset alone in terms of PSNR and SSIM (Fig-
ure 5c-d). As with super-resolution of hyperspectral 
Raman images of MDA-MB-231 breast cancer cells, 
the fine-tuned neural network here produced a highly 
accurate reconstruction with few introduced artefacts 
and a degree of over-smoothing. Meanwhile, bicubic 
upsampling resulted in an image that appears grossly 
similar to the target ground truth image but suffered 
from the introduction of numerous artefacts, resulting 
in both spatial and spectral distortion (Figure 5b-d). 

11 
 
 
Figure 5 | Transfer learning enables effective super-resolution for a small dataset of tissue-engineered cartilage hy-
perspectral Raman images. (a) Transfer learning of our HISR neural network, trained only on MDA-MB-231 breast can-
cer cell images, enabled effective cross-domain 4 super-resolution of hyperspectral Raman images despite having only 
a very small dataset of tissue-engineered cartilage for training. For each condition, images shown on the left are the 
result of a VCA performed on the target HR, high SNR hyperspectral Raman image, which identified 5 key components 
(substrate [blue], dense ECM/cells [green], sparse ECM [yellow], cells [red], and background [black]). VCA components 
were applied to nearest neighbour upsampling, bicubic upsampling, tissue model (from scratch), and cell model (fine-
tuning) images via non-negatively constrained least-squares regression. Images shown on the right for each condition 
are 1450 cm-1 peak intensity heatmaps. All images formed as composition of overlapping 64x64 pixel image patches 
(scale bars = 10 µm). (b) Exemplar Raman spectrum (white arrow in (a)) demonstrating that transfer learning achieves 
high accuracy reconstruction of the target spectra for each pixel. (c-d) Mean test set (c) PSNR and (d) SSIM values for 
nearest neighbour upsampling, bicubic upsampling, and neural network outputs for 4x super-resolution, calculated on a 
per-image patch basis (n = 12 patches) (Error bars: mean ± STD) (One-way paired analysis of variance (ANOVA) with 
Geisser-Greenhouse correction and Tukey’s multiple comparisons test, * P < 0.05, ** P < 0.01, *** P < 0.001). 
 
Discussion 
DeepeR is a comprehensive deep learning framework 
that offers a completely new approach to high-
throughput Raman spectroscopic imaging. We first 
demonstrated that deep learning could be used to 
reconstruct high SNR Raman spectra from low SNR 
inputs, effectively preserving crucial biochemical 
information whilst removing unwanted noisy arte-
facts (Figure 2). Such a spectral-based approach 
could be applied to either spectroscopic imaging (as 
shown here) or point spectroscopy, enabling a signif-
icant reduction in spectral acquisition times. Our 
neural network approach vastly outperformed the 
current state-of-the-art in Raman filtering, more ac-
curately preserving biochemical information while 
enabling a reduction in hyperspectral Raman imaging 
time of up to 10.  
We next developed a neural network for super-
resolution of hyperspectral Raman images, designed 
to reconstruct both spatial and spectral information 
and deliver a substantial reduction in imaging time. 
Our neural network outperformed nearest neighbour 
and bicubic upsampling methods in terms of PSNR, 
SSIM, and MSE, and achieved speed-ups of 4, 9, 
or 16 depending on the super-resolution scale (Fig-
ure 3). 

12 
 
We then sought to achieve extreme speed-ups in 
hyperspectral Raman imaging times through the 
combination of our denoising and super-resolution 
neural networks for high-throughput Raman imaging 
(Figure 4). In doing so, we were able to produce HR, 
high SNR hyperspectral Raman images from LR, low 
SNR inputs and achieve speed-ups of up to 160 
while maintaining high spectral and spatial fidelity to 
the target ground truth HR, high SNR hyperspectral 
Raman image as evidenced by regression of VCA 
endmembers. This approach enabled a reduction in 
Raman cell imaging time from over 68 minutes to 
less than 1 minute. 
Finally, we demonstrated the generalisability of 
DeepeR for hyperspectral Raman imaging, showing 
how transfer learning could be used to extend pre-
trained models to an unrelated biomedical application 
(Figure 5). DeepeR can be applied online or offline 
to existing Raman spectroscopic systems without 
requiring any hardware modifications or imposing 
system limitations using transfer learning. Offline 
application to existing hyperspectral Raman datasets 
could be used to develop custom models for specific 
applications, either from scratch or by transfer learn-
ing from our pre-trained networks. Online applica-
tion, with inference occurring in a matter of seconds 
for a GPU-equipped scientific computer, will deliver 
high-throughput imaging capabilities, transforming 
the potential range of applications for hyperspectral 
Raman imaging. 
DeepeR will thus help to drive forward high-
throughput hyperspectral Raman imaging, represent-
ing a major departure from existing chemometric and 
other multivariate statistical techniques. DeepeR 
achieves this by effectively learning the complex 
spectral and spatial correlations that exist in our large 
dataset of hyperspectral Raman images and exploit-
ing these to achieve state-of-the-art results in Raman 
spectral denoising and hyperspectral Raman image 
super-resolution. Importantly, beyond denoising and 
super-resolution applications, our results demonstrate 
the potential of deep learning to improve hyperspec-
tral Raman analysis with implications for clinical 
diagnostics, chemometric analysis, and sample iden-
tification among others. 
Despite its significant advances, DeepeR does face a 
number of limitations that must be considered before 
application to additional hyperspectral Raman da-
tasets. Most notably, our framework is unlikely to 
accurately reconstruct very fine (e.g. single pixel) 
details and so may not be suitable for HR imaging of 
small, complex specimens. This is analogous to the 
difficulties SISR neural networks face in reconstruct-
ing intricate features present in RGB images40. In 
contrast, the sparsity of such fine details in larger 
specimens such as tissues makes them well suited to 
our deep learning framework. Secondly, while trans-
fer learning using our pre-trained models will enable 
a much wider range of applications, hyperspectral 
Raman images with substantially different spatial and 
spectral features will still require a sufficiently large 
dataset for effective performance. Future work will 
seek to expand the depth and breadth of our hyper-
spectral Raman dataset, encompassing spectra from a 
variety of instruments and samples. This will in-
crease both the performance and generalisability of 
DeepeR. Lastly, before widespread application to 
Raman spectroscopic imaging is possible, large-scale 
prospective validation will need to be performed, 
specific to each application, to ensure diagnostic or 
scientific decisions match those made for corre-
sponding HR, high SNR hyperspectral Raman data. 
There remains scope for improvements in the per-
formance of our deep learning framework, most no-
tably through the collection of larger training datasets 
from different biomedical applications and the devel-
opment of more advanced neural network architec-
tures. Collection of a large dataset of paired low 
SNR, LR and high SNR, HR hyperspectral Raman 
images would enable the training of a joint denoising 
and super-resolution neural network, which we antic-
ipate would produce improved performance in line 
with existing studies on multi-task neural networks41. 
Similarly, performance could be further improved by 
implementing a generative adversarial network 
(GAN) architecture42. GANs have demonstrated an 
array of impressive results for super-resolution of 
RGB images and medical images such as endomi-
croscopy images, outperforming networks trained 
with an L1 loss function in terms of human visual 
perception, and would likely achieve similar results 
for hyperspectral images24,43,44. However, GAN ar-
chitectures pose particularly significant demands on 
computational resources in the context of hyperspec-
tral image super-resolution. 
Though here we demonstrated application of DeepeR 
to Raman spectroscopy, equivalent neural network 
architectures could be generalised to alternative tech-
niques such as FT-IR imaging45, hyperspectral imag-
ing46, or mass spectrometry imaging techniques47. 
DeepeR also paves the way for future pragmatic de-
velopments such as robust autofluorescence removal, 
segmentation or even automated label-free staining 
across multiple spectral imaging techniques. 
In conclusion, DeepeR represents a comprehensive 
deep learning framework for high-throughput hyper-
spectral Raman imaging. This has the potential to 
transform the application of Raman spectroscopic 
imaging in the biomedical sciences, enabling a host 
of higher-throughput applications not previously 

13 
 
possible. Crucially, the information and data we pro-
vide open source to the community, including our 
complete dataset, pre-trained models, and Python 
code will enable rapid expansion and integration of 
our framework into existing Raman spectroscopy 
systems, driving forward high-throughput Raman 
imaging.  
 
Materials and Methods 
Cell Culture 
MDA-MB-231 breast cancer cells were originally 
obtained from the ATCC (Manassas, VA, USA) and 
authenticated via STR profiling. Cells were main-
tained in Dulbecco’s modified Eagle’s medium 
(DMEM), supplemented with 1x non-essential amino 
acids, 25 mM Hepes, 1x penicillin/streptomycin, and 
10% (v/v) foetal bovine serum (FBS), all obtained 
through Gibco (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Inc., Wal-
tham, MA, USA). Cells were grown on magnesium 
fluoride (MgF2) windows (Global Optics Ltd, 
Bournemouth, UK). 20,000 cells per cm2 were seed-
ed in serum-supplemented DMEM and allowed to 
adhere overnight. Prior to imaging, cells were 
washed with DPBS and fixed with 4% (v/v) para-
formaldehyde (PFA, Sigma-Aldrich, St Louis, MO, 
USA) in DPBS for 30 minutes at room temperature. 
PFA solution was aspirated and samples washed 
three times with DPBS. 
 
Tissue Culture and Sample Preparation 
Articular cartilage was excised aseptically from the 
full thickness of metacarpal−phalangeal joints of 
mature cows (n = 3) aged 24 to 36 months within 48 
h of death. Chondrocytes were isolated from the tis-
sue by sequential enzymatic digestion at 37 °C (0.2% 
(w/v) Pronase (Roche Applied Science) in DMEM 
with 4.5 g/L glucose (Invitrogen); for 1 h followed 
by 0.04% (w/v) collagenase type I (Sigma-Aldrich) 
in DMEM overnight. Hydrophilic polytetrafluoro-
ethylene (PTFE) membranes (Millipore) encased in a 
cell chamber were incubated with 100 µL of 0.5 
mg/mL collagen type II (Sigma-Aldrich) in 0.1 N 
acetic acid overnight to allow full evaporation of the 
solution and then washed 3 times in PBS. Cell cham-
bers were placed in 24 well plates, and 750 μL of 
DMEM supplemented with 5% (v/v) FBS (HyClone) 
was added to each well outside the cell chamber. 
Isolated chondrocytes were seeded on top of PTFE 
membrane inserts (1 × 106 cells in 750 μL per mem-
brane; 12 mm diameter) in either 2 mL of DMEM 
with 1 g/L glucose, 11 mL of DMEM with 1 g/L 
glucose, or 11 mL of DMEM with 4.5 g/L glucose; 
supplemented with 5% (v/v) FBS and incubated at 37 
°C and 5% CO2. On day 2, the medium was supple-
mented with ascorbic acid (50 μg/mL; Sigma-
Aldrich) and the FBS supplementation was increased 
to 10% (v/v). Culture medium was changed every 
2−3 days and cultures harvested at 14, 28, or 42 days. 
Tissue-engineered cartilage constructs were washed 
3 times for 15 min in PBS, and fixed in 4% (v/v) 
paraformaldehyde for 30 min. 
Tissue-engineered cartilage constructs were cement-
ed onto a polystyrene surface using a small quantity 
of cyanoacrylate. These were then immersed in a 
drop of water and frozen on a cryosectioning block. 
Using a cryostat (Bright Instruments Ltd.), the tissues 
were sectioned flat at a 45° angle relative to the ar-
ticular surface. Samples were stored at 4 °C in PBS 
until Raman spectroscopic imaging was performed. 
Tissue cross-section samples imaged by Raman spec-
troscopy were prepared to a thickness of greater than 
1 mm. 
 
Raman Spectroscopic Imaging 
Raman imaging was performed using a confocal 
Raman microscope (alpha300R+, WITec, GmbH, 
Germany). A 532 nm laser light source at 35 mW 
power output was applied through a 63x/1.0 NA 
water-immersion microscope objective lens (W Plan-
Apochromat, Zeiss, Germany). Inelastically-scattered 
light was collected through the objective and directed 
via a 100 μm diameter silica fibre, acting as a confo-
cal pinhole, to a high-throughput imaging spectro-
graph (UHTS 300, WITec, GmbH, Germany) with a 
600 groove/mm grating and equipped with a thermo-
electrically cooled (-60 °C) back-illuminated charge-
coupled device (CCD) camera. Hyperspectral Raman 
images were acquired with a 0.5 μm spatial resolu-
tion (1 μm spatial resolution for tissue-engineered 
cartilage) and a 1 second integration time, where for 
each pixel a Raman spectrum was acquired in the 
range from 0 to 3700 cm-1 with a spectral resolution 
of 11 cm-1.  
 
Hyperspectral Raman Image Processing 
Preliminary hyperspectral Raman image processing 
was kept constant for all datasets and performed us-
ing Witec ProjectFOUR software. Spectra were 
cropped to the fingerprint spectral region (600 – 1800 
cm-1) and background autofluorescence subtraction 
performed using ProjectFOUR’s ‘shape’ background 
filter with α = 500. Hyperspectral images were then 
exported to MATLAB.  
 
Neural Network Architecture and Implemen-
tation: Raman Spectral Denoising 
Denoising of Raman spectra was achieved via a 1D 
ResUNet architecture (Figure 1). The network was 

14 
 
trained for 500 epochs using the Adam optimizer48, 
with an L1-norm loss function and a one-cycle learn-
ing rate scheduler. 11 independent models were 
trained, with all of the Raman spectra from a single 
hyperspectral Raman cell image used as the test set 
in each case. In each case, the training and validation 
sets were formed from all of the Raman spectra from 
the remaining 10 hyperspectral Raman cell images. 
Evaluation on the validation set was used to prevent 
overfitting, while all results presented are the mean 
across the 11 test set folds. Full training details are 
provided in Supplementary Table 1. See Supporting 
Information for complete Python training scripts. 
 
Neural Network Architecture and Implemen-
tation: Hyperspectral Super-Resolution 
Hyperspectral Raman image super-resolution was 
performed using a hyperspectral residual channel 
attention network (Supplementary Figure 1). The 
network was trained for 600 epochs using the Adam 
optimizer48, with an L1-norm loss function and a 
constant learning rate. Evaluation on the validation 
set was used to prevent overfitting, while all results 
presented are for the test set. Full training details are 
provided in Supplementary Table 2. See Supporting 
Information for complete Python training scripts. 
Network performance was assessed using two com-
mon image quality metrics, peak signal-to-noise ratio 
(PSNR) and structural similarity index (SSIM). 
The PSNR of an image, y, relative to an uncorrupted 
ground truth image, x, is defined as: 
𝑃𝑆𝑁𝑅(𝑥, 𝑦) = 10 ∙log10 (𝑥𝑚𝑎𝑥
2
𝑀𝑆𝐸) 
Where 𝑥𝑚𝑎𝑥 is the maximum possible pixel value 
(across all channels) of the ground truth image, x, 
and the mean squared error (MSE), calculated across 
all channels, is defined as: 
𝑀𝑆𝐸=
1
𝑚∙𝑛∙𝑝∑∑∑[𝑥(𝑖, 𝑗, 𝑘) −𝑦(𝑖, 𝑗, 𝑘)]2
𝑝−1
𝑘=0
𝑛−1
𝑗=0
𝑚−1
𝑖=0
  
The SSIM between two images, x and y, is a defined 
as 
𝑆𝑆𝐼𝑀(𝑥, 𝑦) =
(2𝜇𝑥𝜇𝑦+ 𝑐1)(2𝜎𝑥𝑦+ 𝑐2)
(𝜇𝑥
2 + 𝜇𝑦
2 + 𝑐1)(𝜎𝑥
2 + 𝜎𝑦
2 + 𝑐2) 
Where 𝜇𝑥 and 𝜇𝑦 are the means of x and y, 𝜎𝑥2 and 
𝜎𝑦2 are the variances of x and y, and 𝑐1 and 𝑐2 are two 
numerical constants to stabilize the division. For 
hyperspectral Raman images, the SSIM is calculated 
independently for each channel and then averaged. 
 
Data Augmentation 
Data augmentation, essential for increasing the effec-
tive dataset size, was performed using a custom 
PyTorch DataGenerator. Data augmentation included 
image subsampling, flipping, rotation, and mixup39, 
as well as spectral shifting and flipping (Supplemen-
tary Figure 3). 
 
Implementation 
Complete implementation details including dataset 
size, training/validation/testing splits, hyperparame-
ter selection, and training times are shown in Sup-
plementary Tables 1 and 2.  
Network training and optimisation was performed 
using the Joint Academic Data science Endeavour 
(JADE) high performance computing (HPC) facility 
on an NVIDIA DGX-1 deep learning system with 8 
NVIDIA V100 GPUs. 
Final network implementation and training was per-
formed in Python 3.7.3 using PyTorch 1.4.0 on a 
desktop computer with a Core i7-8700 CPU at 3.2 
GHz (Intel), 32 GB of RAM, and a Titan V GPU 
(NVIDIA), running Windows 10 (Microsoft). 
 
Supporting Information 
Datasets will be made available upon publication. All 
code and pretrained models are available online at 
https://github.com/conor-horgan/. 
 
Acknowledgements 
This work has received funding from the European 
Research Council (ERC) under the European Union's 
Horizon 2020 research and innovation programme 
(grant agreement No. 802778). This grant has allo-
cated funding for open access publication. This work 
is supported by the Wellcome/EPSRC Centre for 
Medical Engineering [WT 203148/Z/16/Z]. CCH 
acknowledges funding from the NanoMed Marie 
Skłodowska-Curie ITN from the H2020 programme 
under grant number 676137. TV is supported by a 
Medtronic/Royal Academy of Engineering Research 
Chair 
[RCSRF1819/7/34]. 
AN 
and 
MMS 
acknowledge support from the GlaxoSmithKline 
Engineered Medicines Laboratory. M.M.S. acknowl-
edges a Wellcome Trust Senior Investigator Award 
(098411/Z/12/Z). We acknowledge use of the JADE 
HPC facility, which has received funding through the 
Engineering and Physical Sciences Research Council 
(EPSRC). 
 
Conflict of Interest 
TV is founding director and shareholder of Hypervi-
sion Surgical Ltd and holds shares from Mauna Kea 
Technologies. The authors declare no other compet-
ing financial interest. 
 

15 
 
References 
1. 
Horgan, C. C. et al. Molecular imaging of extracellular 
vesicles in vitro via Raman metabolic labelling. J. Mater. 
Chem. B 8, 4447–4459 (2020). 
2. 
Ichimura, T. et al. Visualizing cell state transition using 
Raman spectroscopy. PLoS One 9, (2014). 
3. 
Kong, K. et al. Diagnosis of tumors during tissue-
conserving surgery with integrated autofluorescence and 
Raman scattering microscopy. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. 
A. 110, 15189–94 (2013). 
4. 
Takamori, S. et al. Optimization of multimodal spectral 
imaging for assessment of resection margins during Mohs 
micrographic surgery for basal cell carcinoma. Biomed. 
Opt. Express 6, 98 (2015). 
5. 
Bergholt, M. S. et al. Fiberoptic confocal Raman 
spectroscopy for real-time in vivo diagnosis of dysplasia in 
Barrett’s Esophagus. Gastroenterology 146, 27–32 (2014). 
6. 
Bergholt, M. S. et al. Simultaneous fingerprint and high-
wavenumber fiber-optic Raman spectroscopy enhances 
real-time in vivo diagnosis of adenomatous polyps during 
colonoscopy. J. Biophotonics 9, 333–342 (2016). 
7. 
Smith, G. P. S., McGoverin, C. M., Fraser, S. J. & Gordon, 
K. C. Raman imaging of drug delivery systems. Adv. Drug 
Deliv. Rev. 89, 21–41 (2015). 
8. 
Krafft, C. et al. Label-free molecular imaging of biological 
cells and tissues by linear and nonlinear Raman 
spectroscopic approaches. Angew. Chemie - Int. Ed. 56, 
4392–4430 (2017). 
9. 
Kong, K. et al. Towards intra-operative diagnosis of 
tumours during breast conserving surgery by selective-
sampling Raman micro-spectroscopy. Phys. Med. Biol. 59, 
6141–6152 (2014). 
10. 
Rowlands, C. J. et al. Rapid acquisition of Raman spectral 
maps through minimal sampling: Applications in tissue 
imaging. J. Biophotonics 5, 220–229 (2012). 
11. 
Evans, C. L. et al. Chemical imaging of tissue in vivo with 
video-rate 
coherent 
anti-Stokes 
Raman 
scattering 
microscopy. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. 102, 16807–16812 
(2005). 
12. 
Saar, B. G. et al. Video-rate molecular imaging in vivo 
with stimulated Raman scattering. Science (80-. ). 330, 
1368–1370 (2010). 
13. 
Orringer, D. A. et al. Rapid intraoperative histology of 
unprocessed surgical specimens via fibre-laser-based 
stimulated Raman scattering microscopy. Nat. Biomed. 
Eng. 1, (2017). 
14. 
Krafft, C. & Popp, J. The many facets of Raman 
spectroscopy for biomedical analysis. Anal. Bioanal. 
Chem. 407, 699–717 (2015). 
15. 
LeCun, Y., Bengio, Y. & Hinton, G. Deep learning. Nat. 
Methods 521, 436–444 (2015). 
16. 
Moen, E. et al. Deep learning for cellular image analysis. 
Nat. Methods 16, 1233–1246 (2019). 
17. 
Krizhevsky, A., Sutskever, I. & Hinton, G. E. ImageNet 
classification with deep convolutional neural networks. 
Adv. Neural Inf. Process. Syst. (2012). 
18. 
Devlin, J., Chang, M.-W., Lee, K. & Toutanova, K. BERT: 
pre-training of deep bidirectional transformers for language 
understanding. arXiv Prepr. (2018). 
19. 
Senior, A. W. et al. Improved protein structure prediction 
using potentials from deep learning. Nature 577, 706–710 
(2020). 
20. 
Hollon, T. C. et al. Near real-time intraoperative brain 
tumor diagnosis using stimulated Raman histology and 
deep neural networks. Nat. Med. 26, 52–58 (2020). 
21. 
Ho, C. S. et al. Rapid identification of pathogenic bacteria 
using Raman spectroscopy and deep learning. Nat. 
Commun. 10, (2019). 
22. 
Dong, C., Change Loy, C., He, K. & Tang, X. Learning a 
deep convolutional network for image super-resolution. in 
Proceedings of the European Conference on Computer 
Vision 184–199 (2014). 
23. 
Kim, J., Kwon Lee, J. & Mu Lee, K. Accurate image 
super-resolution using very deep convolutional networks. 
in Proceedings of the IEEE Conference on Computer 
Vision and Pattern Recognition 1646–1654 (2016). 
24. 
Wang, X. et al. ESRGAN: Enhanced super-resolution 
generative adversarial networks. in Proceedings of the 
European Conference on Computer Vision (2018). 
25. 
Yuan, Q., Zhang, Q., Li, J., Shen, H. & Zhang, L. 
Hyperspectral image denoising employing a spatial-
spectral deep residual convolutional neural network. IEEE 
Trans. Geosci. Remote Sens. 57, 1205–1218 (2019). 
26. 
Zhang, K., Zuo, W., Chen, Y., Meng, D. & Zhang, L. 
Beyond a Gaussian denoiser: Residual learning of deep 
CNN for image denoising. IEEE Trans. Image Process. 26, 
3142–3155 (2017). 
27. 
Rahhal, M. M. A. et al. Deep learning approach for active 
classification of electrocardiogram signals. Inf. Sci. (Ny). 
345, 340–354 (2016). 
28. 
Chiang, H. T. et al. Noise reduction in ECG signals using 
fully convolutional denoising autoencoders. IEEE Access 
7, 60806–60813 (2019). 
29. 
Liu, D., Wen, B., Liu, X., Wang, Z. & Huang, T. S. When 
image denoising meets high-level vision tasks: A deep 
learning approach. arXiv Prepr. (2018). 
30. 
Wang, H. et al. Deep learning enables cross-modality 
super-resolution in fluorescence microscopy. Nat. Methods 
16, 103–110 (2019). 
31. 
Chen, Y. et al. Brain MRI super resolution using 3D deep 
densely connected neural networks. bioRxiv (2018). 
32. 
Fang, L. et al. Deep learing-based point-scanning super-
resolution imaging. bioRxiv (2019). 
33. 
Weigert, M. et al. Content-aware image restoration: 
pushing the limits of fluorescence microscopy. Nat. 
Methods 15, 1090–1097 (2018). 
34. 
Ravì, D., Szczotka, A. B., Shakir, D. I., Pereira, S. P. & 
Vercauteren, T. Effective deep learning training for single-
image super-resolution in endomicroscopy exploiting 
video-registration-based reconstruction. Int. J. Comput. 
Assist. Radiol. Surg. 13, 917–924 (2018). 
35. 
Ronneberger, O., Fischer, P. & Brox, T. U-net: 
Convolutional 
networks 
for 
biomedical 
image 
segmentation. in International Conference on Medical 
Image Computing and Computer-Aided Intervention 9351, 
234–241 (2015). 
36. 
Zhang, Y. et al. Image super-resolution using very deep 
residual channel attention networks. in Proceedings of the 
European Conference on Computer Vision 286–301 
(2018). 
37. 
Byrne, H. J., Knief, P., Keating, M. E. & Bonnier, F. 
Spectral pre and post processing for infrared and Raman 
spectroscopy of biological tissues and cells. Chem. Soc. 
Rev. 45, 1865–1878 (2016). 
38. 
Nascimento, J. M. P. & Dias, J. M. B. Vertex component 
analysis: A fast algorithm to unmix hyperspectral data. 
IEEE Trans. Geosci. Remote Sens. 43, 898–910 (2005). 
39. 
Zhang, H., Cisse, M., Dauphin, Y. N. & Lopez-Paz, D. 
mixup: beyond empirical risk minimization. ICLR (2018). 
40. 
Dai, T., Cai, J., Zhang, Y., Xia, S. T. & Zhang, L. Second-
order attention network for single image super-resolution. 
in Proceedings of the IEEE Conference on Computer 
Vision and Pattern Recognition 11057–11066 (2019). 

16 
 
41. 
Zhou, R. et al. W2S: a joint denoising and super-resolution 
dataset. arXiv Prepr. (2020). 
42. 
Goodfellow, I. J. et al. Generative adversarial nets. Adv. 
Neural Inf. Process. Syst. 2672–2680 (2014). 
43. 
Ledig, C. et al. Photo-realistic single image super-
resolution using a generative adversarial network. in 
Proceedings of the IEEE Conference on Computer Vision 
and Pattern Recognition (2017). 
44. 
Ravì, D., Szczotka, A. B., Pereira, S. P. & Vercauteren, T. 
Adversarial 
training 
with 
cycle 
consistency 
for 
unsupervised super-resolution in endomicroscopy. Med. 
Image Anal. 53, 123–131 (2019). 
45. 
Berisha, S. et al. Deep learning for FTIR histology: 
leveraging spatial and spectral features with convolutional 
neural networks. Analyst 144, 1642–1653 (2019). 
46. 
Halicek, M. et al. Hyperspectral imaging of head and neck 
squamous cell carcinoma for cancer margin detection in 
surgical specimens from 102 patients using deep learning. 
Cancers (Basel). 11, (2019). 
47. 
Behrmann, J. et al. Deep learning for tumor classification 
in imaging mass spectrometry. Bioinformatics 34, 1215–
1223 (2018). 
48. 
Kingma, D. P. & Ba, J. L. Adam: A method for stochastic 
optimization. in International Conference on Learning 
Representations 5 (2015). 
 

17 
 
Supplementary Information 
 
Supplementary Figure 1 | Hyperspectral Residual Channel Attention Network. Hyperspectral residual channel atten-
tion network architecture employed for super-resolution of hyperspectral Raman images. The network consists of mul-
tiple repeated sub-units including the residual groups (purple), residual channel attention blocks (orange), and the 
channel attention blocks (green). In the final network architecture, n(residual groups) = 18 and n(residual channel at-
tention blocks) = 16. Spectral downsampling is used at the beginning of the network, exploiting the redundancy of in-
formation contained in the high spectral resolution Raman spectra, to reduce computational load, with spectral up-
sampling placed at the end of the network to return a hyperspectral image with the sample spectral resolution and 
length as the inputs. 
 

18 
 
 
Supplementary Figure 2 | VCA Endmembers for HR, High SNR Hyperspectral Raman Cell Image for Raman Spectral 
Denoising. (a-e) VCA endmembers for high SNR hyperspectral Raman cell image (Figure 2d) corresponding to (a) back-
ground (black), (b) nucleic acids (blue), (c) proteins/lipids (red), (d) lipids (yellow), and (e) proteins (green). 
 
 

19 
 
 
Supplementary Figure 3 | Data Augmentation for Training of Residual Channel Attention Network for Hyperspectral 
Image Super-Resolution. Data augmentations randomly applied to training set of hyperspectral Raman image dataset 
to increase effective dataset size for effective neural network training. Image data augmentations include subsampling 
(selecting different sub-regions of an image), horizontal and vertical flipping, rotations, and mixup (the addition of two 
images following a beta distribution). Additional spectral augmentations include spectral shifting and flipping. 
 

20 
 
 
Supplementary Figure 4 | Deep learning enabled hyperspectral image super-resolution. 2, 3, and 4 super-
resolution of example test set hyperspectral Raman image enables a significant reduction in imaging times (shown in 
white) while recovering important spatial and spectral information (scale bars = 10 µm). Images shown are the result of 
a VCA performed on the target HR hyperspectral Raman image, which identified 5 key components (proteins [green], 
nucleic acids [blue], lipid signature 1 [yellow], lipid signature 2 [red], background [black]). VCA components were ap-
plied to the nearest neighbour output, bicubic output, and neural network output images via non-negatively con-
strained least-squares regression. 
 

21 
 
 
Supplementary Figure 5 | Deep learning enabled hyperspectral image super-resolution. 2, 3, and 4 super-
resolution of example test set hyperspectral Raman image enables a significant reduction in imaging times (shown in 
white) while recovering important spatial and spectral information (scale bars = 10 µm). Images shown are the result of 
a VCA performed on the target HR hyperspectral Raman image, which identified 4 key components (nucleic acids [blue], 
proteins [green], lipids [yellow], background [black]). VCA components were applied to the nearest neighbour output, 
bicubic output, and neural network output images via non-negatively constrained least-squares regression. 
 

22 
 
 
Supplementary Figure 6 | VCA Endmembers for HR, High SNR Hyperspectral Raman Cell Image for Hyperspectral 
Image Super-Resolution. (a-e) VCA endmembers for high SNR hyperspectral Raman cell image (Figure 3) corresponding 
to (a) background (black), (b) lipids (yellow), (c) lipid droplets (magenta), (d) nucleic acids (blue), and (e) proteins 
(green). 

23 
 
 
Supplementary Figure 7 | VCA Endmembers for HR, High SNR Hyperspectral Raman Cell Image for Combined Raman 
Spectral Denoising and Hyperspectral Image Super-Resolution. (a-d) VCA endmembers for high SNR hyperspectral 
Raman cell image (Figure 4) corresponding to (a) nucleic acids (blue), (b) background (black), (c) proteins (green), and 
(d) lipids (yellow). 

24 
 
 
Supplementary Figure 8 | VCA Endmembers for HR, High SNR Hyperspectral Raman Image of Tissue-Engineered Car-
tilage for Transfer Learning. (a-e) VCA endmembers for high SNR hyperspectral Raman cell image (Figure 5) corre-
sponding to (a) substrate (blue), (b) background (black), (c) dense extracellular matrix region (green), (d) cells (red), and 
(e) sparse extracellular matrix region (yellow). 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

25 
 
Supplementary Table 1 | Hyperparameter Details for Training of 1D Residual UNet for Raman Spectral Denoising.  
Hyperparameter 
Details 
Dataset size 
172,312 Raman spectra from 11 hyperspectral 
Raman images 
Training/validation/testing split 
11-fold leave one image out cross-validation 
Training/validation: Raman spectra from 10 
images (90:10 split) 
Testing: Raman spectra from 1 remaining image 
Optimizer 
Adam 
Maximum learning rate 
5x10-4 
Scheduler 
One Cycle LR 
Epochs 
500 
Batch size 
256 
Batch norm 
Yes 
Dropout 
None 
 
 
Supplementary Table 2 | Hyperparameter Details for Training of Residual Channel Attention Network for Hyperspec-
tral Image Super-Resolution.  
Hyperparameter 
Details 
Dataset size 
169 hyperspectral Raman images 
Training/validation/testing split 
85:10:5 
No. Residual groups 
18 
No. Residual blocks 
16 
Optimizer 
Adam 
Maximum learning rate 
1x10-5 
Scheduler 
Constant LR 
Epochs 
600 
Batch size 
2 
Batch norm 
No 
Dropout 
None 
 
 
