Recyclable Flame-retardant Epoxy Composites Based on 
Disulfide Bonds: Flammability and Recyclability 
Xiaolu Li, a,b, Jing Zhang, a,b Lu Zhang, a,c Alaitz Ruiz de Luzuriaga, d Alaitz Rekondo, d  
De-Yi Wang a * 
 
a.IMDEA Materials Institute, C/Eric Kandel, 2, 28906 Getafe, Madrid, Spain 
b.E.T.S. de Ingenieros de Caminos, Universidad Politécnica de Madrid, Calle Profesor 
Aranguren 3, 28040 Madrid, Spain 
c.College of Mechanical and Electrical Engineering, Central South University, 410083 Changsha, 
Hunan, P.R. China 
d.CIDETEC, Basque Research and Technology Alliance (BRTA), Paseo Miramón, 196, 20014 
Donostia-San Sebastián, Spain 
Email: deyi.wang@imdea.org 
Abstract 
A series of recyclable epoxy resin (REP) composites were successfully prepared in this study, aiming to 
improve flame retardancy while keep recyclability and mechanical properties of epoxy. The 9,10-
Dihydro-9-oxa-10-phosphaphenanthrene 10-Oxide (DOPO) with high reactivity on the P-H bond was 
used as highly-efficient flame retardant in this epoxy system. Compared with pure epoxy resin with a 
limited oxygen index (LOI) of 21.7 % and no rating in vertical burning test (UL-94), recyclable epoxy 
resin only with 3 wt% DOPO acquired a LOI value of 27.8% and passed V-0 rating. Based on the results 
of cone calorimeter test (CCT), REP composites containing 4 wt% DOPO had excellent self-extinguish, 
showing the 43.5% drop of the peak heat release rate (pHRR). This was attributed to the charring ability 
in condensed phase and free radical scavenging in gas phase caused by traditional flame retardant DOPO, 
which can play a positive role in inhibiting combustion when burning. In addition, both scanning electron 
microscopy (SEM) and Raman results also exhibited outstanding flame retardancy. Importantly, superb 
dispersion between epoxy and DOPO provided fine transparency and mechanical properties of REP 
composites. Additionally, REP composites with special exchangeable disulfide crosslinks had fantastic 
recyclability. REP composites possessing excellent flame retardancy, recyclability and transparency pave 
the way to broaden application of thermoset epoxy materials.  
Keywords: flame retardant; recyclability; cone calorimeters test (CCT); mechanical properties.  
1. Introduction 

Epoxy resin (EP) has proven to be one of the most prevalent thermosetting resins on account of 
convenient curing processes, superior mechanical property, low shrinkage and strong designability[1, 2]. 
So far, EP materials have been used in industrial appliances of aerospace, construction, coating, etc. 
However, once thermoset materials are damaged, they are difficult to dissolve and reshaped again 
because of crosslinking structure formed between segments, which will lead to a waste of resources and 
cost increase. This limits some applications indirectly. In addition, thermoset EP are flammable materials. 
Thus, recyclability and flame retardancy of EP materials are still challenging.  
For improving repairability of epoxy, dispersing the thermoplastic healing agent into EP to form shape 
memory matrix is one method[3, 4]. Another common strategy is adding microencapsulated healing 
agent and catalyst[5-10]. Once thermoset materials are destroyed, healing agent is released to start self-
healing process. Recently, the introduction of dynamic chemical bonds has been the novel way to 
promote repairability and recyclability, accompanying by the emergence of some new concepts 
“vitrimers, dynamers and covalent adaptable networks (CANs)”. Among them, the concept of “vitrimers” 
puts forward by Leibler and co-workers[11] and vitrimer materials developed according to the dynamic 
exchange reaction are the first recyclable thermosets. The popular dynamic exchange reactions include 
carboxylate transesterification[12], transcarbamoylation[13], siloxane silanol exchange[14], disulfide 
exchange[15-18] and imine amine exchange[19]. However, the described vitrimers, still have some 
problems in the application process. Considering the above application problems, a new epoxy vitrimer 
system with special 3R properties (reprocessable, reparable and recyclable) is chosen in this work, in 
comparison to other vitrimer materials where no catalyst is needed to activate the 3R properties under 
high temperature.  
Considering the impact of flame retardants on environment, more and more eco-friendly flame 
retardants had been studied widely to polymers aiming to improve the flame retardancy. [20-26] Amongst 
these flame-retardant studies, DOPO and its derivatives are one of the common phosphorus flame 
retardants, and have been used in epoxy system widely. A new DOPO derivative of DOPMPA synthesized 
by DOPO and piperazine was used as flame retardant of EP. Until the addition of flame retardant was 13 
wt%, EP/DOPMPA blend passed a UL-94 V-0 rating and possessed lower release of heat and smoke[27]. 
Furthermore, Shanglin Jin et al. also reported flame retardant ABD of EP formed by acrolein and DOPO. 
Only adding 3 wt% of ABD can make EP acquire a high limit oxygen index and level of UL-94[28]. 
Phosphorus compounds show a good influence on improving flame retardancy of epoxy. DOPO and its 

derivatives play a role in not only gas phase but also condensed phase because of reactive P-H bond. 
Then phosphorus-containing compounds would be a good choice to act as flame retardant for epoxy. 
Both flame retardancy and recyclability are important properties for epoxy resins. Herein, this work 
aims to fabricate a kind of recyclable flame-retardant epoxy, keeping balance of excellent flame 
retardancy and recyclability. Friendly DOPO is used as flame retardant of recyclable epoxy resin. The 
flame retardancy of epoxy improves by exploiting the free radical trapping mechanism in gas phase and 
carbon formation mechanism in condensed phase. Even if a small amount of flame retardant is adding, 
epoxy can gain effective flame-retardant performance. Furthermore, flame retardant has excellent 
compatibility with matrix, and flame-retardant epoxy still displays good transparency. In addition, 
mechanical properties of composites do not exhibit reduction. A new kind of recyclable flame-retardant 
epoxy has been synthesized, which can provide guidance to develop other novel recyclable flame-
retardant epoxy resin. 
2. Results and discussion 
2.1 Reactivity between REP and DOPO 
The P-H bond in DOPO has a certain activity because of the adjacent strong electron-absorbing group 
P=O bond. The epoxy group has a high degree of tension because of its three-membered ring, which is 
active and easy to be opened. The two are easier to react to form phosphorus-containing epoxy 
composites, the corresponding structure is shown in Figure 1. (A). Both of DSC and FTIR tests are 
carried out to detect the reaction between epoxy group and reactive P-H bond. For better showing the 
reaction, the weight ration of REP and DOPO is around 10:3 for DSC and FTIR tests. 
DSC curves (Figure 1. (B)) recorded the thermal convert process during the reaction of epoxy group 
with P-H bond. The heat phenomenon of REP does not appear any change during the whole heating 
course. However pure DOPO shows a sharp peak at about 118 °C, corresponding to the melting 
endothermic process. Cured REP sample also does not display intensive heat, meaning the curing process 
finished completely. But there is a gently endothermic peak at preheating temperature of around 90 °C 
of EP-30% DOPO sample, demonstrating the reaction between epoxy group and P-H bond[29]. 
FTIR test was also used for further verifying the pre-reaction between epoxy group and P-H bond of 
DOPO. Just like the FTIR curves shown in Figure 1. (C), both of raw materials epoxy and DOPO appear 
their characteristic peaks. For REP sample, the peaks are located at 1250 cm-1, 1510 cm-1, 2980 cm-1, 915 

cm-1 and 3397 cm-1 respectively, corresponding to C-O stretch vibration peak, benzene ring stretching 
vibration peak, alkyl stretching peak, the characteristic absorption peak of oxirane group and hydroxyl 
group. In the spectrum of DOPO, the peaks are located at 1230 cm-1, 1590 cm-1, 2430 cm-1 and 3360 cm-
1 respectively, corresponding to the vibration of P=O bond, the Ph skeleton, the distinct P-H bond and 
hydrogen stretching vibration of Ph skeleton[30-32]. However, the EP-30% DOPO composite displays 
the different characteristic peak in comparison to REP and DOPO. The hydroxyl group shifts to 3510 
cm-1 from the peak at 3430 cm-1 of REP sample because of chemistry environment change around 
hydroxyl group. That indicates some EP has reacted with DOPO, causing chemistry environment change. 
In addition, by compared with the Tg of REP, Tg values of REP composites with different flame retardant 
DOPO decreases gradually with the increase of DOPO content (Figure 1. (D)). This might cause by the 
reduction of cross-linking density of epoxy thermosets, being also attributed to the reaction between P-
H bond and epoxy group. These results show the pre-reaction between epoxy and flame retardant, causing 
the well mixture. This will play an important role in improving properties of epoxy, especially the 
transparency (Figure S5).  
 
Figure 1. (A): Schematic outline of phosphorus-containing epoxy resin[33]; DSC curves (B) and FTIR 
spectrum (C) of different samples; (D) DSC curves of REP composites. 
2.2 Fire behaviors of REP composites 
As small-scale fire tests, the LOI and UL-94 tests were applied to evaluate the flammability of REP 
composites first of all. Neat REP with a LOI value of 21.7% is flammable material and difficult to self-
extinguish. After ignition of pure REP, it can be burned out into a flash immediately, accompanied by the 

formation of a large amount of smoke and dripping fiercely which can ignite cotton. It also fails to pass 
UL-94 level. Once adding flame retardant DOPO, both the LOI values and UL-94 level of REP 
composites improve. As the amount of DOPO raises from 1 wt% to 4 wt%, the LOI value of REP 
composites gradually increases from 24.3 % to 29.5 %. In the meanwhile, REP composites containing 
DOPO present dramatically better self-extinguish ability after removing ignition, even at low loading of 
DOPO. Though REP-1% blend does not self-extinguished, its dripping after burning does not ignite the 
cotton in comparison to pure REP. Along with the content of DOPO reached 2 wt%, REP-2% shows a 
significant effect in UL-94 test (V-2). In addition, both of REP-3% and REP-4% composites can reach 
V-0 level at UL-94 test with a total burning time less than 10 s. The LOI and UL-94 results demonstrate 
that DOPO can show the obvious influence on improving flame retardancy. This is mainly due to the free 
radical scavenging capability showing by phosphoric containing flame-retardant DOPO, which can 
suppress flame combustion process. 
CCT was carried out to further evaluate combustion performance of REP composites seriously. The 
parameters include pHRR, total heat release (THR), effective heat combustion (EHC) and residue weight, 
corresponding curves over time and data are displayed in Figure 2 and Table S2. For pure REP specimen, 
it holds a sharp HRR peak with the value of 1369 kW/m2. After adding DOPO, the curves undergo an 
evident decline gradually over test time. The pHRR values of REP composites cut down to 974 kW/m2, 
835 kW/m2, 870 kW/m2 and 774 kW/m2 respectively. This indicates the flame retardant can improve 
flame retardancy significantly of REP system. In addition, it is noteworthy that REP composites 
containing DOPO all present two small slope peaks. The formation and accumulation of protective char 
layer caused in the early stage can be acted as barrier for hindering the spread of heat and oxygen. Once 
the accumulation of heat and volatiles reaches a certain extent, the initial char layer might be broken and 
further fire grow to form second peak. Furthermore, the pHRR of REP composites becomes gentle 
gradually, which means the formation of the stronger of char layer resulting from the catalytic action of 
phosphorus from DOPO, especially by comparison to pHRR of pure REP. Meanwhile, THR of REP 
composites also show decrease trend compared with pure REP. EHCe values of REP composites also 
decrease with the increase of DOPO, implying that DOPO displays strong quenching effect and 
combustion inhibition effect in gas phase. The time-varying trend of residual mass of REP composites is 
similar to TGA curves, which further shows the promoted carbonization by DOPO. Both of these results 
demonstrate better flame retardancy owning the exist of phosphorus, leading to the improvement of 

catalytic charring capabilities and free radical scavengers’ effect in gas phase.  
 
Figure 2. (a) the summary of LOI and UL-94 tests results; (b) HRR, (c) THR, (d) residue weight vs time 
curves of REP composites. 
2.3 Flame retardant mechanism 
In an effect to investigate the condensed phase mechanism, SEM analysis and Raman spectra were 
carried out to detect different microstructure of residue char of REP composites. Figure 3. (A) displays 
the digital and SEM images of different residue char after CCT test. Pure REP burns out completely and 
there are few residual chars left. So, the structure of residue char of REP is porous and fragmentary, that 
means the char layer is not dense enough to inhibit the escape of decomposed gases. However, once 
adding DOPO into REP composites, the char morphologies show an obvious discrimination. As the 
amount of DOPO increases, the char structure gradually becomes more compact and integrated, which 
can improve the intumescent effect. This indicates that addition of DOPO can form flame shield during 
combustion. 
The microstructure of residue chars was further analyzed by Raman spectrum. As shown by curves in 
Figure 3. (B), all curves appear one broad peaks at 1352 cm-1 and one sharp peak at 1594 cm-1 
representatively, belonging to D and G peak respectively. Usually, D peak is associated with vibrations 

of carbon atoms with dangling bonds, G peak is associated with vibration in all sp2 bonded carbon atoms 
in a 2-dimensional hexagonal lattice[34,35]. Moreover, the intensity ratio of D peak to G peak is 
calculated to evaluate residual char’s graphitization degree. As seen, in comparison to ID/IG value of pure 
REP, ID/IG value of REP composites increases with the increase of flame retardant, displaying the smaller 
size of carbonaceous microstructure[36]. That means the formation of better char layer of REP 
composites, which can be served as a better protective barrier. It is beneficial to improve flame retardancy 
of REP system. 
 
Figure 3. (A) Digital images of residue char and corresponding SEM images of residual char for REP 
composites; (B) Raman spectra of residual char for REP composites. 
According to the above discussion results, the possible flame-retardant mechanism is proposed and 
the corresponding scheme is shown as below. In this recyclable flame-retardant REP system, DOPO 
displays a positive role in gas phase and condensed phase because of the excellent compatibility between 
small amount of DOPO and epoxy matrix. In the condensed phase, REP composites containing P element 
can facilitate the dehydration and char formation, showing better barrier to inhibit the release of heat and 
oxygen. Meanwhile, REP composites can produce some P-containing free radical such as PO· and 

HPO· free radical to quench H· and OH· active radicals caused from combustion, which can further 
terminate the combustion chain reaction in gas phase. Both of the positive effect in the condensed phase 
and free radical scavenging in gas phase caused by flame retardant lead to superb flame retardancy.   
 
Figure 4. Schematic illustration of combustion mechanism. 
2.4 Mechanical behaviors of REP composites 
In order to check if the addition of flame retardant can affect mechanical and dynamic properties of 
flame-retardant epoxy vitrimers, both stress relaxation measurements tensile tests were carried out. A 1 % 
of strain is applied at different temperatures above the Tg and the relaxation modulus over time was 
monitored. The relaxation time (τ*) at each temperature is determined as the time needed to relax the 
67 % of the initial relaxation modulus G0 according to Maxwell model for viscoelastic fluids. The 
temperature dependence of τ* for all vitrimers is fit to an Arrhenius relationship so as to calculate the 
activation energy (Ea) of flame-retardant epoxy vitrimers. All Arrhenius plots present a linear correlation 
of ln (τ) with 1000/T in the measured temperature range. 
Normalized stress relaxation curve of REP composites at different temperatures is shown in Figure 
S2. The activation energy of REP composites calculated is in line with previously obtained results[16, 
17], are166 KJ/mol, 152 KJ/mol, 136 KJ/mol and 123 KJ/mol respectively. A slight decrease is due to 
the consumption of epoxy groups with DOPO, which can reduce the crosslinking density of formulation 
with the increase of DOPO content. It is observed that the lower of Tg causes the shorter of relaxation 
time at the same temperature. This observation is attributed to the enhanced diffusion and exchange of 
reactive groups due to its lower crosslinking density and viscosity. On the other hand, there is a decrease 
on the activation energy. That is because of the more thermal dependence of the exchange kinetics of the 

networks when increasing the Tg. Moreover, the DMA results are also shown in Figure S3. Compared 
with different REP composites, there is also no evident decrease in these results.   
2.5 Recyclability of REP composites 
The presence of dynamic covalent bonds in the flame-retardant REP vitrimers permits the recycling 
of this thermoset materials since the dynamic covalent bonds are capable to exchange by heating above 
its Tg. In an attempt to investigate the recyclability of flame-retardant epoxy vitrimers, just REP-3% 
sample was chosen to verify. Pictures in Figure 5 show detailed process. Cured REP-3% was grinded 
into powder firstly and the obtained powder was hot-pressed at 200 ºC at 100 bars for 5 min. It is easy to 
see that defect free laminate is obtained after reprocessing process. Moreover, REP-3% composite still 
expresses relatively high transparency even adding flame retardant.  
To fully characterize the original and the recycled samples, they are subjected to uniaxial tensile test 
until break, Dumbbell shape specimens of the pristine and recycled REP-3% are tested with a universal 
tensile machine (Figure S4). The reprocessed REP-3% composite shows almost the same mechanical 
properties as pristine material (90 % of initial tensile strength is achieved). Recycled REP-3% sample 
displays higher disparity than the pristine material in the tensile strength values due to presence of 
porosity in the lamina due to lack of pressure in some zones. Theoretically, this process could be repeated 
as many times as desired, although repeated processing might cause the aging of the material leading to 
lower mechanical properties.  

 
Figure 5. (a) the detailed recyclability process of REP-3%; (b) schematic diagram of exchangeable 
disulfide crosslinks. 
3. Conclusion  
The facile way was used to prepare recyclable flame-retardant epoxy in this work. The flame retardancy 
of REP composites is significantly improved even at the low loading of flame retardant. By comparison 
to neat REP sample, REP-3% composites only adding 3 % DOPO into epoxy can pass V-0 level of UL-
94 test, with the relatively high LOI value of 27.8 %. In addition, pHRR of REP-4% decreases by about 
43.5 % to the value of 774 kW/m2, which attributes to accelerated charring ability to inhibit oxygen. The 
CCT results also show a decrease of EHCe value, indicating the DOPO acts in gas phase by free radicals 
scavenging effect. It is worth nothing that epoxy can still display recyclability even if the addition of 
flame retardant because of exchangeable disulfide crosslinks. Furthermore, REP composites show good 
transparency and same mechanical properties with pure REP sample. This research paves the way to 
obtain recyclable flame-retardant epoxy materials. It is also more conducive to broaden the application 
of epoxy.  
 
 

Acknowledgements 
This work is partly funded by China Scholarship Council, China under the Grant CSC (201908110272). 
Funding Sources 
This work did not receive any specific funding from funding agencies in public, commercial. 
 
References 
[1] J. Green, A review of phosphorus-containing flame retardants, Journal of Fire Sciences. 10 (2016) 
470-487. 
[2] X. Wang, E.N. Kalali, D.-Y. Wang, Carbon-family materials for flame retardant polymeric materials, 
Progress in Polymer Science. 69 (2017) 22-46. 
[3] S.A. Hayes, F.R. Jones, K. Marshiya, A self-healing thermosetting composite material, Composites 
Part A: Applied Science and Manufacturing. 38 (2007) 1116-1120. 
[4] M. Zako, N. Takano, Intelligent material systems using epoxy particles to repair microcracks and 
delamination damage in GFRP, Journal of Intelligent Material Systems and Structures. 10 (2016) 
836-841. 
[5] J. D. Rule, E. N. Brown, N. R. Sottos, Wax-protected catalyst microspheres for effivient self-healing 
materials, Advance Materials. 17 (2005) 205-208. 
[6] P.A. Pratama, M. Sharifi, A.M. Peterson, Room temperature self-healing thermoset based on the diels-
alder reaction, ACS applied materials & interfaces. 5 (2013) 12425-12431. 
[7] Y.C. Yuan, M.Z. Rong, M.Q. Zhang, Self-healing polymeric materials using epoxy/mercaptan as the 
healant, Macromolecules. 41 (2008) 5197-5202. 
[8] Y.C. Yuan, X.J. Ye, M.Z. Rong, Self-healing epoxy composite with heat-resistant healant, ACS 
applied materials & interfaces. 3 (2011) 4487-4495. 
[9] C.L. Mangun, A.C. Mader, N.R. Sottos, Self-healing of a high temperature cured epoxy using 
poly(dimethylsiloxane) chemistry, Polymer. 51 (2010) 4063-4068. 
[10] H. Jin, C.L. Mangun, D.S. Stradley, Self-healing thermoset using encapsulated epoxy-amine healing 
chemistry, Polymer. 53 (2012) 581-587. 
[11] D. Montarnal, M. Capelot, L. Leibler, Silica-like malleable materials from permanent organic 
networks, Science. 18 (2011) 965-968. 
[12] M. Capelot, M.M. Unterlass, F. Tournilhac, Catalytic control of the vitrimer glass transition, ACS 
Macro Letters. 1 (2012) 789-792. 
[13] P. Yan, W. Zhao, X. Fu, Multifunctional polyurethane-vitrimers completely based on 

transcarbamoylation of carbamates: thermally-induced dual-shape memory effect and self-welding, 
RSC Advances. 7 (2017) 26858-26866. 
[14] M.O. Saed, E.M. Terentjev, Siloxane crosslinks with dynamic bond exchange enable shape 
programming in liquid-crystalline elastomers, Scientific Reports. 10 (2020) 6609. 
[15] I. Azcune, I. Odriozola, Aromatic disulfide crosslinks in polymer systems: self-healing, 
reprocessability, recyclability and more, European Polymer Journal. 84 (2016) 147-160. 
[16] A. Ruiz de Luzuriaga, R. Martin, N. Markaide, Epoxy resin with exchangeable disulfide crosslinks 
to obtain reprocessable, repairable and recyclable fiber-reinforced thermoset composites, Materials 
Horizons. 3 (2016) 241-247. 
[17] A. Ruiz de Luzuriaga, R. Martin, N. Markaide, Correction: epoxy resin with exchangeable disulfide 
crosslinks to obtain reprocessable, repairable and recyclable fiber-reinforced thermoset composites, 
Materials Horizons. 7 (2020) 2460-2461. 
[18] A. Ruiz de Luzuriaga, J.M. Matxain, I. Odriozola, Transient mechanochromism in epoxy vitrimer 
composites containing aromatic disulfide crosslinks, Journal of Materials Chemistry C. 4 (2016) 
6220-6223. 
[19] M. Ciaccia, R. Cacciapaglia, P. Mencarelli, Fast transimination in organic solvents in the absence of 
proton and metal catalysts. A key to imine metathesis catalyzed by primary amines under mild 
conditions, Chemical Science. 4 (2013). 
[20] J. Zhang, Z. Li, X.-L. Qi, D.-Y. Wang, Recent Progress on Metal–Organic Framework and Its 
Derivatives as Novel Fire Retardants to Polymeric Materials, Nano-Micro Lett. 12 (2020) 1-21.  
[21] F. Fang, P. Song, S. Ran, Z. Guo, H. Wang, Z. Fang, A facile way to prepare phosphorus-nitrogen-
functionalized graphene oxide for enhancing the flame retardancy of epoxy resin, Compos Commun. 
10 (2018) 97-102.  
[22] Y.-M. Li, S.L. Hu, D.-Y. Wang, Polymer-based ceramifiable composites for flame retardant 
applications: A review, Compos Commun. 21 (2020) 100405.  
[23] Y. Liu, D.-Y. Wang, J.-S. Wang, Y.-P. Song, Y.-Z. Wang, A novel intumescent flame-retardant LDPE 
system and its thermo-oxidative degradation and flame-retardant mechanisms. Polym Adv Technol. 
19, (2008), 1566-1575.  
[24] J. Zhang, Z. Li, G.-Z. Yin, D.-Y. Wang, Construction of a novel three-in-one biomass based 
intumescent fire retardant through phosphorus functionalized metal-organic framework and β-
cyclodextrin hybrids in achieving fire safe epoxy, Compos. Commun. 23 (2021) 100594.   
[25] F. Fang, S. Huo, H. Shen, S. Ran, H. Wang, P. Song, Z. Fang, A bio-based ionic complex with 
different oxidation states of phosphorus for reducing flammability and smoke release of epoxy 
resins, Compos. Commun. 17 (2020) 104-108. 

[26] Z. Chi, Z. Guo, Z. Xu, A DOPO-based phosphorus-nitrogen flame retardant bio-based epoxy resin 
from diphenolic acid: Synthesis, flame-retardant behavior and mechanism, Polymer Degradation 
and Stability. 176 (2020) 109151. 
[27] R. Chen, K. Hu, H. Tang, A novel flame retardant derived from DOPO and piperazine and its 
application in epoxy resin: flame retardance, thermal stability and pyrolysis behavior, Polymer 
Degradation and Stability. 166 (2019) 334-343. 
[28] S. Jin, L. Qian, Y. Qiu, High-efficiency flame retardant behavior of bi-DOPO compound with 
hydroxyl group on epoxy resin, Polymer Degradation and Stability. 166 (2019) 344-352. 
[29] X.M. Zhao, J. Llorca, D.Y. Wang, Impact of halogen-free flame retardant with varied phosphorus’s 
chemical surrounding on the properties of diglycidyl ether of bisphenol-A type epoxy resin: 
synthesis, fire behaviour, flameretardant mechanism and mechanical properties, RSC advances. 
(2013). 
[30] J. Zhao, X. Dong, S. Huang, Performance comparison of flame retardant epoxy resins modified by 
DPO–PHE and DOPO–PHE, Polymer Degradation and Stability. 156 (2018) 89-99. 
[31] H. Wang, S. Li, Z. Zhu, A novel DOPO-based flame retardant containing benzimidazolone structure 
with high charring ability towards low flammability and smoke epoxy resins, Polymer Degradation 
and Stability. (2020) 109426. 
[33] J. Zou, H. Duan, Y. Chen, A P/N/S-containing high-efficiency flame retardant endowing epoxy resin 
with excellent flame retardance, mechanical properties and heat resistance, Composites Part B: 
Engineering. 199 (2020) 108228. 
[33] D.M. Velencoso, M.C. Markwart, F.R. Wurm, Molecular firefighting-how modern phosphorus 
chemistry can help solve the flame retardancy task, Angew Chemie. 57 (2018) 10450-10467. 
[34] A. Sadezky, H. Muckenhuber, H. Grothe, Raman microspectroscopy of soot and related 
carbonaceous materials: spectral analysis and structural information, Carbon. 43 (2005) 1731-1742. 
[35] P. Wang, L. Xia, R. Jian, Flame-retarding epoxy resin with an efficient P/N/S-containing flame 
retardant: Preparation, thermal stability, and flame retardance, Polymer Degradation and Stability. 
149 (2018) 69-77. 
[36] J. Zhang, Z. Li, D.Y. Wang, Bimetallic metal-organic frameworks and graphene oxide nano-hybrids 
for enhanced fire retardant epoxy composites: A novel carbonization mechanism, Carbon. 153 (2019) 
407-416. 
 
