1 
Recyclable vitrimer-based printed circuit board  
for circular electronics 
 
Zhihan Zhang1, Agni K. Biswal2, Ankush Nandi2, Kali Frost3, Jake A. Smith1,3,  
Bichlien H. Nguyen1,3, Shwetak Patel1, Aniruddh Vashisth2*, Vikram Iyer1* 
 
1 Paul G. Allen School of Computer Science & Engineering, University of Washington  
2 Department of Mechanical Engineering, University of Washington 
3 Microsoft Research 
* Corresponding authors: vashisth@uw.edu or vsiyer@uw.edu 
 
 

1 
Abstract 
Electronics are integral to modern life; however, at their end-of-life these devices produce 
environmentally hazardous electronic waste (e-waste). Recycling the ubiquitous printed circuit 
boards (PCBs) that make up a substantial mass and volume fraction of e-waste is challenging due 
to their use of irreversibly cured thermoset epoxies. We present a PCB formulation using 
transesterification vitrimers (vPCBs), and an end-to-end fabrication process compatible with 
standard manufacturing ecosystems. We create functional prototypes of IoT devices transmitting 
2.4 GHz radio signals on vPCBs with electrical and mechanical properties meeting industry 
standards. Fractures and holes in vPCBs can be repaired while retaining comparable performance 
over more than four repair cycles. We further demonstrate non-destructive decomposition of 
transesterification vitrimer composites with solid inclusions and metal attachments by polymer 
swelling with small molecule solvents. We hypothesize that unlike traditional solvolysis recycling, 
swelling does not degrade the materials. Through dynamic mechanical analysis we find negligible 
catalyst loss, minimal changes in storage modulus, and equivalent polymer backbone composition 
across multiple recycling cycles. We achieve 98% polymer recovery, 100% fiber recovery, and 
91% solvent recovery which we reuse to create new vPCBs without degraded performance. Our 
cradle-to-cradle life-cycle assessment shows substantial environmental impact reduction over 
conventional PCBs in 11 categories. 
 

2 
Main 
Electronics have become an increasingly integral part of modern life in everything from consumer 
devices like smartphones and laptops to state-of-the-art industrial, scientific and medical 
technologies. However, when electronics reach the end of their life cycle due to obsolescence or 
damage, they become electronic waste (e-waste) and pose significant environmental hazards. E-
waste contains a complex toxic mixture of various metals, silicon integrated circuits (ICs), glass 
fibers, thermoset polymers, flame retardants, and more, which can pollute the air, soil, and water 
posing significant hazards for the surrounding communities1–3. With over 53.6 million metric tons 
(Mt) generated in 2019 alone4, e-waste is one of the fastest-growing waste streams globally5 and 
a matter of global concern6. 
In response to this issue, efforts are underway to reduce e-waste by transitioning to a 
circular economy model in which electronics can be transformed into secondary raw materials. A 
key challenge in achieving a circular manufacturing cycle is the recycling of printed circuit boards 
(PCBs). PCBs are ubiquitous in electronics and rank within the world’s top 100 most traded 
products7. They form the physical substrate upon which chips are mounted and connected with 
metal traces patterned on their surface. PCBs are most commonly composite materials made of 
glass fiber weaves within a flame-retardant thermoset epoxy matrix (FR-4). The majority of prior 
recycling efforts have focused on the recovery of intact ICs and high-value minerals such as gold 
and copper8,9; however 70% of a PCB’s volume and mass is made up of dielectric substrates10.  
To maximize sustainability, we aim to create a PCB that can be repeatedly recycled to 
produce brand-new circuits with the same performance. Achieving a scalable and closed-loop 
circular manufacturing cycle presents several challenges. First, PCBs must be capable of tolerating 
electronics manufacturing processes which include chemical etching, electroplating, and elevated-

3 
temperatures for soldering. Prior water-soluble11–16 and healable materials17 sacrifice compatibility 
with these methods to achieve recyclability which limits their potential to scale. Additionally, these 
materials do not meet the rigorous standards for moisture absorption, flammability, dielectric 
constant, loss tangent, and other criteria needed to produce high-speed and RF circuits common in 
modern electronics. Second, the irreversibly cured thermosets in the dielectric substrates like FR-
4 are formulated to be resistant to fire and chemicals, which makes it incredibly challenging to 
fully deconstruct them into raw materials for recycling. While substituting thermoplastics in place 
of these thermosets is a potential solution, thermoplastic reprocessing damages the polymer 
chains18, which reduces their thermal and mechanical properties and prevents their reuse in new 
PCBs. Third, closed-loop recycling imposes the strict constraint of deconstructing composites into 
raw materials without damage. A number of methods have been explored to recycle these materials 
however they all result in substantial material damage19,20. Direct mechanical grinding and 
crushing of waste PCBs are among the simplest, however it is incompatible with recycling 
composite materials like FR-4. This process destroys the glass fiber and polymer, preventing them 
from being reused for making a new board. Mechanical recycling is used to homogenize the PCB 
so that it can be put into a furnace or subjected to a chemical leaching process for commercial 
metal recovery, however, these methods also suffer from low efficiency in the separation of metals. 
In contrast,  thermal decomposition (pyrolysis), or chemical dissolution in strong solvents 
(solvolysis) have higher efficiency but require high processing temperatures which increases 
energy costs21, or require nonreusable solvents21,22 thereby producing hazardous byproducts23. 
Additionally, many of these methods are only able to recycle the glass fiber and dissolve the 
polymer chains completely22. Because thermosets lack the ability to reform bonds, the material 

4 
properties of the recycling outputs are degraded thereby limiting their application potential and 
reuse cycles. 
In this article, we present a different solution by introducing a novel PCB formulation using 
transesterification vitrimers (vPCBs) that are specifically designed for circularity. We then develop 
techniques for vPCB repair, and non-destructive recycling methods for vitrimer composites with 
solid inclusions by polymer swelling using small molecule solvents accompanied by analyzing the 
underlying mechanisms. Recent work has shown that dynamic covalent adaptive networks (CANs) 
with associative exchange reactions can undergo reversible crosslinking at elevated temperatures24. 
These materials, termed vitrimers, exhibit dynamic covalent bond exchange reactions when heated. 
This enables the unique healing capabilities of vitrimers25 and repeated reversal of fatigue-induced 
damage to recover properties close to those of the original material26, allowing the recovered 
materials to be reused repeatedly with minimal degradation. We specifically focus on vitrimers 
with associative exchange reactions over dissociative mechanisms due to their ability to maintain 
a high crosslink density over multiple recycling cycles. Replacing the traditional thermoset epoxy 
matrix with a vitrimer addresses the fundamental recycling challenge described above. vPCBs not 
only enable the repair of PCBs but also open up the potential for high-value recycling by reusing 
the polymer to create a new, high-performance PCB. Further, these methods could be generalized 
to this entire class of vitrimer polymers whose backbones can be tuned to achieve desired material 
properties.  
Fig. 1 illustrates our fully circular manufacturing and recycling pipeline which highlights 
our key contributions. First, we create glass fiber-reinforced vitrimer composites and develop an 
end-to-end PCB fabrication process compatible with current electronic manufacturing services 
(EMS) ecosystems including multi-layer copper lamination, chemical etching, laser structuring, 

5 
electroless plating, and soldering. We perform detailed characterization of our vPCBs 
demonstrating they meet industry standards for peel strength of copper-clad laminates, flexural 
strength, moisture absorption, dielectric constant, and resistivity. We then use them to demonstrate 
a fully functional IoT sensor capable of transmitting 2.4 GHz Bluetooth signals. Second, we 
leverage the bond exchange capabilities of vitrimers to repair physical damage to vPCBs.  We 
repair fractures, holes and mechanical deformations, demonstrating that repaired vPCBs maintain 
their mechanical and electrical properties over more than four repair cycles. We verify the absence 
of microcracks and pores using scanning electron microscopy (SEM) and show that covalent 
bonding achieves higher joint strength than cyanoacrylate adhesives in shear punch tests.   
Third, we develop an end-to-end recycling process for our vPCBs. We observe that certain 
solvents can cause the vitrimer to swell, and leverage this polymer swelling in small-molecule 
solvents to deconstruct transesterification vitrimer composites with solid inclusions and metal 
attachments. We hypothesize that unlike traditional solvolysis recycling, swelling does not degrade 
the materials; however, this method raises a number of fundamental questions of whether the 
process removes non-covalently bonded catalyst critical to the transesterification vitrimer’s 
properties, effects on the crosslink density, and integrity of the polymer backbone. We develop a 
process to create recycled samples and comprehensively investigate these questions across 
multiple recycling cycles. We perform dynamic mechanical analysis revealing negligible change 
in vitrimer transition temperature (Tv) of ± 0.7 °C indicating no catalyst loss, and minimal change 
in storage modulus (3.1%) which depends on crosslink density. We confirm with Fourier-
transform infrared spectroscopy (FTIR) spectroscopy that the molecular structure remains 
unchanged, and verify recycled vPCBs have mechanical and electrical properties on par with the 
original. Our recycling process achieves 98% recovery of the vitrimer polymer and 100% recovery 

6 
of glass fibers, and even a 91% recovery of the solvent which we successfully reuse. Fourth, we 
perform a comprehensive cradle-to-cradle life-cycle assessment (LCA) leveraging industrial scale 
models to compare the environmental impact of our remanufacturing and recycling systems with 
conventional PCBs. Our results show a 47.9% improvement in global warming potential, 65.5% 
in ozone depletion potential, and 80.9% in human cancer toxicity emissions for our recycling 
process compared to conventional PCB end-of-life disposal scenarios. 
 

7 
Fig 1. Transesterification vitrimer-based fully recyclable PCB 
 
Conceptual diagram showing the closed-loop repair and recycling of vPCB. a, GFRV composite. 
b, Cross-sectional view of a three-layer vPCB. c, Photograph of a vPCB-based recyclable IoT next 
to a server. The printed circuit board assembly (PCBA) can be repaired if warping or damage 
occurs in the base material. After the device is decommissioned, the substrate materials can be 
recycled and the electronic components could be reused. d, Recovered vitrimer from obsolete 
vPCB after drying and pulverizing, which can be reused to fabricate new GFRVs. 
 

8 
Results 
Glass fiber reinforced vitrimer composites 
To enable PCB circularity, we seek to disassemble the entire board into its constituent raw 
materials without damage for reuse. While the electronics and copper traces can be recovered using 
thermal exposure27 or the same chemical etchants used to pattern the circuits28, the dielectric 
substrate material remains. The most common material, FR-4 is a combination of a woven glass 
fiber impregnated with a thermoset epoxy resin. The covalent crosslinks of these thermosets give 
the material desirable properties such as high structural integrity, chemical stability, and resistance 
to temperature. These properties, however, present a trade-off common in sustainability: the 
material’s robustness makes it very difficult to effectively separate the epoxy and glass fibers for 
recycling or reuse. 
In this work, we take a different approach inspired by recent advancements in healable 
materials to re-engineer PCBs using polymers with dynamic covalent adaptable networks (CANs); 
vitrimers are a special class of CANs with a thermosetting macromolecular network with healing 
abilities. This property also enables entirely new capabilities. First, it enables remanufacturing, in 
which holes in the material can be refilled and segments can be tiled together without transforming 
them back into raw starting materials. Second, the ability to reuse vitrimers as secondary raw 
materials opens the possibility for effective recycling if they can be non-destructively separated 
from the glass fibers. Our vitrimer polymers are synthesized from a bifunctional epoxide (DGEBA) 
and an acid (adipic acid) in the presence of a catalyst Triazabicyclodecene (TBD). The chemical 
structures for the reaction are shown in Fig. 2a. In contrast to the prior attempts at integrating 
healable polymers into circuits29, our vitrimer chemistry is optimized for similarity to conventional 
FR-4 by choosing a bisphenol-A epoxide which is typically used in PCBs30. The normalized stress-

9 
relaxations at temperatures ranging from 140 °C to 240 °C and the characterized storage modulus 
and tan delta for vitrimer with a 5 mol % catalyst concentration are shown in Extended Data Fig. 
1. It is noteworthy that by tuning the specific components and functional groups (Fig. 2d), a wide 
variety of different properties can be achieved31–33, such as a higher glass transition temperature 
(Tg) of 146 °C34. 
Our recyclable GFRV composites are created using a scalable fabrication process similar 
to conventional FR-4 fabrication shown in Fig. 2b (see Methods for additional details). Figure 2c 
schematically illustrates the structure of the resulting GFRV.  
Moisture absorption of GFRV is characterized through immersion in water according to 
the IPC PCB standard (see Methods for additional details). Moisture can accelerate various failure 
mechanisms in PCBs by causing cracking, delamination, soldering issues, and changes in dielectric 
properties. High moisture absorption is a common failure mode for many sustainable PCB 
materials, as moisture ingress usually weakens polymer by hydrolytic cleavage in chains35. Fig. 2e 
shows our vitrimer is on par with common PCB dielectrics like polyimide and within 0.2% of the 
FR-4 standard. We hypothesize this difference is due to the presence of the ester linkages between 
monomers, and this value could be further reduced by modifying the vitrimer chemistry. 
Flexural strength is also evaluated using a three-point flexural test (see Methods) and the 
results are visualized in Fig. 2f. The performance is within the range of FR4-based materials and 
these values could be tuned by changing the quality of the glass fiber weave. 
 

10 
Fig. 2: Glass fiber reinforced vitrimer composite. 
 
a, Reaction of transesterification vitrimer under heat and pressure. b, Schematic of the fabrication 
process of GFRV. c, Schematic of four-layer glass fiber GFRV. d, Bond exchange via 
transesterification in vitrimer networks enables healing and recyclability when heated. Properties 
can be tuned by changing the functional chains R1 and R2 in the epoxide and acid used. e, 
Characterized moisture absorption of GFRV compared to the PCB standards (N = 3, error bar = 
±𝜎). f, Characterized flexural strength of GFRV compared to the PCB standards of woven glass 
FR-4 and woven e-glass fabric FR-4. 
 

11 
Vitrimer-based PCB 
We create recyclable, reusable, and repairable circuit boards by integrating these unique vitrimer 
materials into PCBs. The first step to creating a PCB from the raw GFRV is to add a conductive 
copper layer for circuit traces. In traditional PCB manufacturing, a glass fiber weave is 
impregnated with a phenolic epoxy resin, and partially cured. The resulting material, known as 
prepreg, is then laminated with thin copper foil and can be patterned and stacked to create 
multilayer circuits. To create the vPCBs, a similar lamination process is used as illustrated in Fig. 
3a. Sheets of copper foil are laminated on the raw GFRV in a heat press (see Methods for details). 
This method can easily scale to roll-to-roll manufacturing for high-volume production.  
To assess the quality of vPCB copper adhesion, the peel strength for 16 copper-clad 
laminates (CCLs) is systematically measured for heat press temperatures of 120-160 °C and heat 
press time of 30 min-2 h. Empirical measurements were performed due to the complexities of 
accurately modeling the adhesion bonds formed by heat and pressure on polymer surfaces. Our 
results show that the interfacial adhesion between copper and vitrimer increases as the heat press 
temperature and time increase (Fig. 3b). We note however that above 180 °C lower viscosity 
causes the vitrimer to be squeezed out. The results follow the expected trend, whereby the increase 
in temperature and pressure results in dissociation in the covalent adaptive network, thereby 
increasing the availability of functional reactive sites for adhesion. Bonding can be further 
improved by adding a thin, partially cured vitrimer layer between GFRV and copper foil This 
significantly enhances peel strength after thermal stress, exceeding the PCB standard (Extended 
Data Fig. 2), as the partially cured vitrimer has more reactive sites available. 
Next, circuit traces are patterned onto the raw copper-coated substrate. Chemical etching 
and laser structuring are the two commonly used processes in PCB manufacturing. Laser 

12 
structuring is often used for more intricate circuits due to its high precision, ability to cut through 
a wider range of materials, and speed in small-scale manufacturing. Chemical etching is less 
precise but is more suited to low-cost, large-scale production because it can etch many parts or 
multiple boards simultaneously. We demonstrate compatibility with both manufacturing processes. 
Briefly, the raw copper-coated GFRV laminate is placed in a laser micromachining system (LPKF 
Protolaser U4), where the laser is used to both drill holes and directly remove copper to create a 
circuit. Alternatively, we can coat the copper with a thin mask layer and use the laser to remove 
the mask in selective regions, then place the board in ferric chloride solution to etch away the 
exposed copper. This method can be used to pattern individual layers of material that can then be 
aligned and heat pressed to create a multi-layer laminate. The final step is applying an additional 
mask layer and using an electroless copper plating process to connect the layers through vias (See 
Methods for additional details). 
The fabricated circuits are characterized to compare vPCBs to traditional FR4-based 
circuits. The dielectric constant of the PCB substrate material is crucial for achieving good high-
frequency electrical performance, as it affects the intensity of signal reflections and crosstalk, 
which ultimately impacts the overall signal integrity. The measured dielectric constant and loss 
tangent of the vPCB substrate compared to the PCB standards of various FR-4 types are shown in 
Fig. 3c, d, respectively (details on characterization procedures are provided in the Methods). The 
results show that the dielectric constant for our vPCB is within the typical range of 3.5 to 5.5, 
demonstrating it meets the required specifications. We note that this value can also be tuned to 
meet the needs of the application by changing the glass fiber volume content, vitrimer chemistry, 
and polymer-free volume.  

13 
Low flammability is another crucial property required to protect PCBs from potential 
ignition as many electronic components produce heat and contain flammable polymers. 
Conventional PCB substrates such as FR-4 are formulated with flame retardants to self-extinguish 
potential fires. To evaluate the flammability of vPCB, a GFRV is rigorously tested using a burner, 
and found to exhibit excellent fire-retardant properties. As shown in Fig. 3e, the fire was 
extinguished within 7 seconds after the removal of the flame source (Fig. 3e, Supplementary Video 
2), conforming to the 10-second standard. 
 

14 
Fig. 3: Characterization of vPCB. 
 
a, Schematic of the scalable manufacturing process of vPCB. b, Curves of the peeling force per 
width of copper-clad versus displacement for laminates with various heat press temperatures and 
times (N ≥ 3, shaded region indicates max and min values of trials). c, d, Characterized dielectric 
constant (c), and loss tangent (d) of vPCB compared to the PCB standards of various FR-4 (N = 3, 
error bar = ±𝜎). e, Flammability test of vPCB. The sample is retracted after 0 s to move it away 
from the burner. 

15 
Platform evaluation 
To evaluate the potential of our recyclable PCBs for real-world applications, we create a 
functional prototype of an IoT sensor to monitor environmental conditions such as temperature, 
humidity, and pressure. Such sensors provide critical information for environmental and smart-
building monitoring, and this industry is projected to grow by billions of new devices in the coming 
years which raises a pressing need to mitigate the environmental harms of the e-waste they will 
generate36. In addition to being a high-impact application, a complete IoT sensor requires meeting 
numerous technical specifications which highlight the versatility of our vPCBs. The platform must 
perform all the basic functions of a small computer, demonstrating the potential for using vPCBs 
in a variety of computing devices. Beyond the standard requirements of consumer electronics, IoT 
devices must also be capable of high-frequency signaling for transmitting and receiving radio 
signals at GHz frequencies which are affected by PCB properties such as dielectric constant and 
loss tangent. 
We create an end-to-end prototype of a wireless environmental sensor with vPCB 
according to the schematic shown in Fig. 4a and deploy it on a server rack as shown in Fig. 4b. 
Our device includes a microcontroller with an integrated Bluetooth radio, a digital sensor, a coin 
cell battery, onboard chip antenna, and assorted passive components (see Methods for additional 
details). We fabricate the circuit on both vPCB and standard FR-4, and program both to wirelessly 
transmit sensor measurements from a data center setting for 16 hours. Figs. 4c-e show the resulting 
temperature, pressure, and humidity. Both devices were able to successfully transmit Bluetooth 
packets and no gaps are observed in the data from device failure. The data show the sensors 
themselves are closely correlated due to their proximity, but with small fixed offsets likely due to 
individual sensor variation or their small physical separation. 

16 
To further qualitatively analyze the signal integrity of circuits on vPCB, we perform eye 
diagram measurements that reflect vital parameters for signal in digital transmissions, such as 
signal-to-noise ratio (SNR) and clock timing jitter. A well-routed signal line is designed and 
patterned onto both vPBC and FR-4. A serial BERT (Keysight N4903A) is used to generate a 2.48 
Gb/s pseudorandom binary sequence (PRBS), and the eye diagram is measured by a wide-
bandwidth oscilloscope (Keysight 86100D). Our vPCB has nearly identical performance as 
standard FR-4 at a glance (Fig. 4f). 
 

17 
Fig. 4: Platform evaluation 
 
a, Circuit block diagram. ADC, analogue-to-digital converter; PKT GEN, packet generation; C1–
C2, capacitor 1–capacitor 2; L1, inductor 1; X1, 32 MHz crystal oscillator 1; I2C, Inter-Integrated 
Circuit. b, Photograph of experimental set-up. c, d, e, Data center temperature (c), relative 
humidity (d), and pressure (e) measurements from two platforms over 16 h showing successful 
continuous running and high-frequency signal transmission. f, Comparison of eye diagrams of FR-
4 and vPCB. 
 

18 
Repair and remanufacturing 
A unique property of our vPCBs is that the vitrimer’s dynamic covalent bonds enable reliable 
healing of physical damage such as fractures and holes. This opens up the ability to repair and 
remanufacture PCBs to reduce their environmental impact and promote a circular economy. A 
recent study from Microsoft37 showed that repairing broken devices with replaceable parts resulted 
in a reduction of up to 85% in greenhouse gas (GHG) emissions and 90% in waste avoidance 
compared to replacing the whole device. Once these devices are beyond repair, we explore the 
potential of vPCBs to enable value cycling by repairing physically damaged base materials and 
remanufacturing them into new ones. 
A repair method is developed that heals holes and fractures as shown in Fig. 5a. Copper is 
first removed through chemical etching. Subsequently, a small amount of fresh vitrimer material 
in liquid form is applied to fill the holes and follow the same heat press process shown in Fig. 2b 
to create a new CCL. The repaired GFRV is shown in Fig. 5a, wherein all the through holes have 
been healed with no discernable marks indicating the hole location. The joint strength of healed 
via holes is also evaluated using a shear punch test (see Methods for details and Extended Data 
Fig. 3). A comparison is made between the FR4 with repaired via holes using cyanoacrylate glue 
and the results indicate that vitrimer creates a stronger interface at the hole boundary, avoiding 
catastrophic failure as seen with the superglue bond that breaks. The healing capability of vitrimer 
chemistry enables the creation of new covalent bonds between fresh vitrimer and GFRV. 
Specifically, the transesterification reaction occurring in the vitrimer system leads to topological 
rearrangements while preserving the integrity of the molecular network26,38. This healing 
mechanism cannot be achieved by those of traditional thermoplastics or thermosetting plastics. 

19 
Using the same fabrication steps described in the previous section we can use the resulting bare 
GFRV to create new circuits. 
To evaluate our healed composite, the copper adhesion is first measured after four cycles 
of copper re-lamination as shown in Fig. 5b. Interestingly, we find that the interfacial adhesion 
improves after each repair cycle. This is likely attributed to the micro-scale indentations on the 
GFRV surface caused by heat-pressed copper foil, as observed using SEM shown in Fig. 5c. These 
indentations increase the surface roughness after each remanufacturing attempt, which is known 
to improve adhesion39. The dielectric constant and volume resistivity of the repaired material are 
evaluated following and found to remain within the range of common FR-4 varying by a maximum 
of 6.5% even after four repair cycles as shown in Fig. 5d,e. 
vPCBs also have shape-memory properties that can be used to reverse physical damage 
that can occur due to mechanical stress such as GPU sagging. Mechanical deformation of the vPCB 
below its Tv results in a temporary shape change. Subsequent heat treatment at 100 °C (above both 
Tg and Tv) for 1 min prompts the material to revert back to its original, pre-deformation 
configuration. Figure 5f demonstrates a GFRV that has been deformed under an external force, 
then successfully recovers to its thermodynamically favored original shape after heat treatment. 
This shape-memory attribute not only underscores the inherent self-healing properties of vitrimers 
but also further highlights the potential for the circular reuse of mechanically damaged vPCB 
materials. 
 

20 
Fig. 5: Repair and remanufacturing of vPCB 
 
a, Optical micrographs of a via on vPCB being healed. b, Average peeling force of copper-clad 
after three repair cycles for various specimens with secondary vertical axes showing the 
corresponding surface roughness before each repair cycle (N = 4, error bars = ±𝜎). c, SEM images 
of GFRV surface after each repair cycle, showing orderly indentations caused by heat-pressed 
copper foil. d, e, Characterized dielectric constants (d), and volume resistivities (e) of repaired 
GFRV after each repair cycle (N ≥ 3 (d) and N = 1000 (r), error bars = ±𝜎). Remanufactured vPCB 
exhibits nearly identical dielectric constants and volume resistivities. f, Thermadapt shape-
memory behavior of GFRV. GFRV is deformed under external force, and is recovered to its 
original shape after being heated at 100 °C for 1 min. This allows for the repair of warped vPCBs 
at elevated temperatures, making it a more environmentally friendly option compared to traditional 
PCBs. 
 

21 
Closed-loop recycling 
Vitrimer-based PCBs can be repeatedly repaired through the process described above, however 
these PCBs will eventually reach the end-of-life when a design becomes outdated or if repair is no 
longer economically feasible. To maximize circularity, we further develop a closed-loop recycling 
process for end-of-life vPCBs to nondestructively disassemble the fiber composites back into high-
quality raw materials for use in creating new, fully functional circuit boards.  
We begin the vPCB recycling processes by removing the components, cleaning the surface, 
and then dissolving the copper using ferric chloride to isolate the GFRV substrate (see Methods 
for details). Fig. 6a illustrates our process for deconstructing the GFRV into raw materials. We 
immerse the GFRV sample in various polar aprotic solvents for the extraction of glass fibers. We 
examined acetone, chloroform, dimethylformamide (DMF), and tetrahydrofuran (THF). We found 
that DMF and THF do not react with the GFRV materials but can ingress into the polymeric 
network due to their small molecules, resulting in swelling (Extended Data Fig. 4, Supplementary 
Video 1). This swelling enables the separation of the vitrimer matrix and glass fibers without 
chemical degradation. We select THF for our recycling process, as it achieves similar swelling 
performance but has a low boiling point of 66 °C and enables easy solvent removal to recover the 
vitrimer. In contrast, DMF has a higher boiling point of 153 °C and requires rotary evaporation 
which may result in the loss of the catalyst in the material (see Supplementary 1.1 for additional 
discussion).  
The vitrimer matrix is fully separated from the glass fiber layers after immersion in THF 
for 96 hours (shown in Fig. 6a, details are provided in the Methods). The recovered vitrimer and 
glass fiber are shown in Fig. 6a, b, respectively, and can be reused directly after drying. Vitrimer 
polymer can be easily recovered with ~98% isolated yield after being precipitated out from the 

22 
THF, and 100% of the glass fiber is recovered. We also demonstrate a THF recovery efficiency of 
approximately 91%, with 1.5% being lost due to evaporation during testing and measurements, 
and 7.5% remaining in the swollen vitrimer matrix which was not attempted to recapture. The THF 
recovery efficiency could be further optimized to over 97% by performing recycling in a properly 
designed and operated recovery system40. This is a marked improvement over previous solvolysis 
methods, which necessitate additional adsorption or distillation procedures to remove the solvent 
and recover the polymer matrix. 
We create new GFRV samples using recycled materials by grinding the recovered vitrimer 
into a fine powder, mixing it with a 40 wt% fresh vitrimer matrix in viscous liquid form to fully 
penetrate the small interspaces in our dense glass fiber weave, and applying the same heat press 
process described above. We note the required pressure has an inverse quartic relationship to pore 
size according to the Hagen Poiseuille equation suggesting the potential for using 100% recycled 
vitrimer by adjusting the material or process parameters (see Supplementary 1.2 for additional 
discussion). The resulting reformed GFRV is shown next to a newly made GFRV sample in Fig. 
6c. The resulting composite showed no apparent differences except for slight discoloration on the 
surface due to thermal oxidation.  
We hypothesize above that swelling does not degrade the materials; however, this method 
raises a number of fundamental questions of whether the process removes non-covalently bonded 
catalyst critical to the transesterification vitrimer’s properties, whether it affects the crosslink 
density, or changes the polymer backbone. Next, we perform a series of experiments to investigate 
our hypothesis that small molecule solvent-based swelling does not degrade the materials and 
understand the underlying mechanisms of our recycling process. We first examine SEM images of 
reformed GFRV which show smooth surfaces without any noticeable damage in the form of 

23 
microcracks or pores (Fig. 6c). At a macro-scale, this confirms that the dynamic nature of the 
polymeric macromolecular network is preserved after every recycling as the polymer can flow and 
form a continuous sheet from pulverized recycled vitrimer powder without being dissociated by 
the solvent.  
The mechanical behavior of the recycled vitrimer matrix is evaluated by comparing the 
storage modulus and tan delta values post-recycling (Extended Data Fig. 5a,b). We quantify the 
retention of storage modulus post-recycling, observing 96.9% after one recycle cycle and 94.4% 
after two cycles (Extended Data Fig. 5c). Although we observe some narrowing and broadening 
of the tan delta peak between cycles (see Supplementary 1.3 for additional discussion), the high 
storage modulus retention clearly attests that the reduction in crosslink density induced by our 
swelling recycling approach is negligible. To evaluate the potential loss of non-covalently attached 
catalyst during our recycling procedure, we leveraged Maxwell’s relation for viscoelastic materials 
to derive Arrhenius curves41 (Extended Data Fig. 5d). We determined a Tv of 79.6 °C for pristine 
vitrimer. Upon recycling once, the Tv was slightly reduced to 78.3 °C and 79.4 after recycling 
twice. The marginal shift in Tv implies no loss of the non-covalently bonded catalyst throughout 
our THF swelling recycling process across multiple cycles, as a reduction in catalyst concentration 
within vitrimer would precipitate a substantial increase in Tv41. 
To further confirm the maintained chemical composition of the vitrimer polymer backbone 
after the recycling process, samples at different recycling stages are analyzed using Fourier-
transform infrared (FTIR) spectroscopy and compared with a new GFRV sample in Fig. 6e. We 
observe the disappearance of 903 cm-1 for epoxy functional group after the vitrimer is cured, and 
the appearance of sharp peaks at 1037, 1726 and broad intense peaks at 3359 cm-1 for -CO-O-, -
C=O, and -OH groups respectively. This indicates the consumption of all epoxy end groups for 

24 
the formation of ester linkages with crosslinked networks in vitrimers. The recovered vitrimer 
retained identical functional groups with characteristic peaks as the original, as shown in Fig. 6d, 
which indicates that recycled vitrimers maintain their crosslink density and undergo exchange 
reactions without changing the chemical polymer backbone. Figure 6e also indicates that the 
vitrimer can resist ferric chloride corrosion, which enables the production of vPBC through the 
conventional and scalable PCB manufacturing technique of chemical etching. The properties of 
GFRV made of recycled vitrimer are also highly comparable to the original one (Extended Data 
Fig. 6). 
 

25 
Fig. 6: Recycling of vPCB 
 
a, Photographs showing recycling procedures of GFRV from obsolete PCB and recovered vitrimer 
matrix after precipitation from the THF. b, Photograph of reclaimed glass fiber weaves and SEM 
image showing the clean microstructure from recycling. c, The recovered vitrimer was reused to 
form new GFRVs. The appearance of reformed composite maintains nearly identical to the pristine, 
and SEM images show smooth surfaces of reformed GFRV without any microcracks or pores. d, 
Comparison of FTIR spectra of pristine vitrimer, vitrimer after etching, and recovered vitrimer 
from THF. e, Environmental impact comparison of conventional FR-4 PCB and vPCB in end-of-
life disposal scenarios across 11 different categories. vPCB is assumed either four cycles of 
remanufacturing or recycling, with a THF recovery efficiency of 97% in the recycling scenario. 
As a comparison baseline, FR-4 PCB is assumed to have 5 lifetimes with the best-case assumption 
for end-of-life incineration. The vPCB results are normalized to the FR-4 PCB for each category 
respectively. 
 

26 
Life-cycle assessment  
When proposing new remanufacturing or recycling processes, it is important to assess their 
environmental impacts or benefits using tools such as LCA42. We perform an LCA to evaluate the 
environmental impact of our vPCB and compare our remanufacturing and recycling processes to 
conventional PCB fabrication and disposal at scale. Our cradle-to-cradle LCA uses industrial 
models and encompasses material synthesis, CCL manufacturing, freight transportation, and end-
of-life PCB disposal or recycling.  
Notably, the GFRV fabrication process produces cured laminates. This is a key advantage 
over conventional prepreg materials which are only partially cured and have a limited shelf life of 
3-6 months32. Maximizing the lifetime of conventional prepreg materials requires refrigeration and 
low-humidity environments, thereby increasing their environmental footprint. To quantify this 
difference, we compared the environmental impact of vPCB freight with conventional FR-4 
prepregs. The LCA results demonstrate a substantial reduction of 20.0% in global warming 
potential, 28.0% in ozone depletion potential, 14.0% in fossil depletion, and 26.0% in mineral and 
metal use (Extended Data Fig. 7). 
In order to compare the environmental impact of vPCBs with conventional PCBs in end-
of-life scenarios, we use the business-as-usual standard of incineration as the baseline for the latter. 
Our model makes the best-case assumption for conventional PCBs, in which 89.3% of the waste 
heat and 11.1% of the waste electricity will be recovered and credited as energy production. Our 
remanufacturing scenario models the case where a product is repaired and remanufactured, with 
certain parts replaced as necessary. Our LCA model looks specifically at the environmental cost 
of remanufacturing the PCB using the method described in the section above. In the recycling 

27 
scenario, the product is broken down into its component raw materials, which are then reused in 
creating new PCBs.  
The results, as shown in Fig. 6e, indicate that vPCBs have the potential to substantially 
reduce numerous environmental impacts including acidification, global warming potential, and 
ozone depletion potential. Extended Data Fig. 8 shows a detailed breakdown of the carbon 
footprint of a conventional PCB indicating that raw materials make up 48.5% of the total 
environmental cost. We show however that leveraging the unique healing properties of our vPCB 
enables remanufacturing with significantly less material and energy and allows this process to be 
repeated for multiple cycles to further reduce impact. Our LCA assessment indicates that this 
method would reduce all of the studied environmental impact metrics by over 65% with four 
remanufacturing cycles.  
The primary benefits of using vPCBs are reducing end-of-life byproducts, disassembling 
end-of-life vPCBs into raw materials and creating new, fully functional circuit boards. The 
environmental impact resulting from four recycling cycles shows a remarkable reduction in 11 
metrics of up to 80.9%. This includes a 35.8% reduction in acidification, 47.9% in global warming 
potential impact, 59.1% in freshwater ecotoxicity, 61.8% in human non-cancer toxicity emissions, 
65.5% in ozone depletion potential, 38.0% in particulate matter, 45.9% in photochemical ozone, 
40.2% in fossils depletion, 79.2% in mineral and metals use, and a 28.1% reduction in water use 
over four recycling cycles. It is noteworthy that the use of vPCBs could lead to savings of up to 
80.9% in human cancer toxicity emissions. 
In this study, we have reported a recyclable PCB based on transesterification vitrimers and 
a nondestructive, swelling-based separation for vitrimer composite recycling. Our design achieves 
the following three key goals: 1) raw materials with strong adhesion between the vitrimer material 

28 
and copper layers on par with FR-4 PCBs, 2) compatibility of vPCBs with the traditional, 
inexpensive PCB manufacturing processes to enable scalable production including multi-layer 
designs, 3) electrical and mechanical properties comparable to standard FR-4 PCBs required to 
create functional circuits. Such recyclable PCBs with excellent electrical and mechanical 
properties, chemical etchant resistance, repairability, and closed-loop recyclability, make them a 
promising and straightforward alternative solution to conventional PCBs. Not only do they reduce 
the toxic byproduct problems associated with conventional PCBs, but they also significantly 
improve a broad range of environmental impact metrics. Additionally, the abundance and 
widespread commercial availability of epoxies and catalysts with varying properties create 
numerous opportunities to experiment with new vitrimer formulations optimized for specific 
properties. Our approach of swelling PCBs could also be explored for automated disassembly of 
circuit components to simultaneously enhance value recovery from ICs while recycling raw 
materials. We hope this study will open up new directions for the development and application of 
emerging recyclable polymeric materials and composites for the electronics and computer industry 
that centers on environmental sustainability. 
 

29 
Data availability 
All data needed to evaluate the conclusions of the paper are available in the paper or in the 
Extended Data and Source Data. 
 

30 
Reference 
1. Hibbert, K. & Ogunseitan, O. A. Risks of toxic ash from artisanal mining of discarded 
cellphones. J. Hazard. Mater. 278, 1–7 (2014). 
2. Awasthi, A. K., Zeng, X. & Li, J. Environmental pollution of electronic waste recycling in 
India: A critical review. Environ. Pollut. 211, 259–270 (2016). 
3. Song, Q., Li, J. & Zeng, X. Minimizing the increasing solid waste through zero waste 
strategy. J. Clean. Prod. 104, 199–210 (2015). 
4. Forti, V., Balde, C. P., Kuehr, R. & Bel, G. The Global E-waste Monitor 2020: Quantities, 
flows and the circular economy potential. (United Nations University/United Nations Institute 
for Training and Research, International Telecommunication Union, and International Solid 
Waste Association, 2020). 
5. Abdelbasir, S. M., Hassan, S. S. M., Kamel, A. H. & El-Nasr, R. S. Status of electronic waste 
recycling techniques: a review. Environ. Sci. Pollut. Res. 25, 16533–16547 (2018). 
6. Ogunseitan, O. A., Schoenung, J. M., Saphores, J.-D. M. & Shapiro, A. A. The Electronics 
Revolution: From E-Wonderland to E-Wasteland. Science 326, 670–671 (2009). 
7. Ogunseitan, O. A. et al. Biobased materials for sustainable printed circuit boards. Nat. Rev. 
Mater. 7, 749–750 (2022). 
8. Yang, C., Li, J., Tan, Q., Liu, L. & Dong, Q. Green Process of Metal Recycling: Coprocessing 
Waste Printed Circuit Boards and Spent Tin Stripping Solution. ACS Sustain. Chem. Eng. 5, 
3524–3534 (2017). 
9. Zeng, X., Mathews, J. A. & Li, J. Urban Mining of E-Waste is Becoming More Cost-Effective 
Than Virgin Mining. Environ. Sci. Technol. 52, 4835–4841 (2018). 

31 
10. 
Hsu, E., Durning, C. J., West, A. C. & Park, A.-H. A. Enhanced extraction of copper 
from electronic waste via induced morphological changes using supercritical CO2. Resour. 
Conserv. Recycl. 168, 105296 (2021). 
11. 
Kawahara, Y., Hodges, S., Cook, B. S., Zhang, C. & Abowd, G. D. Instant inkjet circuits: 
lab-based inkjet printing to support rapid prototyping of UbiComp devices. in Proceedings of 
the 2013 ACM international joint conference on Pervasive and ubiquitous computing 363–
372 (Association for Computing Machinery, 2013). doi:10.1145/2493432.2493486. 
12. 
Siegel, A. C. et al. Foldable Printed Circuit Boards on Paper Substrates. Adv. Funct. 
Mater. 20, 28–35 (2010). 
13. 
Huang, X. et al. Biodegradable Materials for Multilayer Transient Printed Circuit Boards. 
Adv. Mater. 26, 7371–7377 (2014). 
14. 
Cheng, T. et al. Silver Tape: Inkjet-Printed Circuits Peeled-and-Transferred on Versatile 
Substrates. Proc. ACM Interact. Mob. Wearable Ubiquitous Technol. 4, 6:1-6:17 (2020). 
15. 
Arroyos, V. et al. A Tale of Two Mice: Sustainable Electronics Design and Prototyping. 
in Extended Abstracts of the 2022 CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems 
1–10 (Association for Computing Machinery, 2022). doi:10.1145/3491101.3519823. 
16. 
Cheng, T. et al. SwellSense: Creating 2.5D interactions with micro-capsule paper. in 
Proceedings of the 2023 CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems 1–13 
(Association for Computing Machinery, 2023). doi:10.1145/3544548.3581125. 
17. 
Kuang, X., Mu, Q., Roach, D. J. & Qi, H. J. Shape-programmable and healable materials 
and devices using thermo- and photo-responsive vitrimer. Multifunct. Mater. 3, 045001 
(2020). 

32 
18. 
Shojaeiarani, J., Bajwa, D. S., Rehovsky, C., Bajwa, S. G. & Vahidi, G. Deterioration in 
the Physico-Mechanical and Thermal Properties of Biopolymers Due to Reprocessing. 
Polymers 11, 58 (2019). 
19. 
Mir, S. & Dhawan, N. A comprehensive review on the recycling of discarded printed 
circuit boards for resource recovery. Resour. Conserv. Recycl. 178, 106027 (2022). 
20. 
Rocchetti, L., Amato, A. & Beolchini, F. Printed circuit board recycling: A patent review. 
J. Clean. Prod. 178, 814–832 (2018). 
21. 
Chen, Z. et al. Recycling Waste Circuit Board Efficiently and Environmentally Friendly 
through Small-Molecule Assisted Dissolution. Sci. Rep. 9, 17902 (2019). 
22. 
Khrustalev, D., Tirzhanov, A., Khrustaleva, A., Mustafin, M. & Yedrissov, A. A new 
approach to designing easily recyclable printed circuit boards. Sci. Rep. 12, 22199 (2022). 
23. 
Beeler, B. & Bell, L. Plastic Recycling Schemes Generate High Volumes of Hazardous 
Waste. IPEN https://ipen.org/news/plastic-recycling-schemes-generate-high-volumes-
hazardous-waste (2021). 
24. 
Montarnal, D., Capelot, M., Tournilhac, F. & Leibler, L. Silica-Like Malleable Materials 
from Permanent Organic Networks. Science 334, 965–968 (2011). 
25. 
Zheng, N., Xu, Y., Zhao, Q. & Xie, T. Dynamic Covalent Polymer Networks: A 
Molecular Platform for Designing Functions beyond Chemical Recycling and Self-Healing. 
Chem. Rev. 121, 1716–1745 (2021). 
26. 
Kamble, M. et al. Reversing fatigue in carbon-fiber reinforced vitrimer composites. 
Carbon 187, 108–114 (2022). 
27. 
Park, S., Kim, S., Han, Y. & Park, J. Apparatus for electronic component disassembly 
from printed circuit board assembly in e-wastes. Int. J. Miner. Process. 144, 11–15 (2015). 

33 
28. 
Lee, M.-S., Ahn, J.-G. & Ahn, J.-W. Recovery of copper, tin and lead from the spent 
nitric etching solutions of printed circuit board and regeneration of the etching solution. 
Hydrometallurgy 70, 23–29 (2003). 
29. 
Zou, Z. et al. Rehealable, fully recyclable, and malleable electronic skin enabled by 
dynamic covalent thermoset nanocomposite. Sci. Adv. 4, eaaq0508 (2018). 
30. 
Kehong, F. High performance epoxy copper clad laminate. Circuit World 30, 16–19 
(2004). 
31. 
Guerre, M., Taplan, C., Winne, J. M. & Prez, F. E. D. Vitrimers: directing chemical 
reactivity to control material properties. Chem. Sci. 11, 4855–4870 (2020). 
32. 
Yang, Y., Xu, Y., Ji, Y. & Wei, Y. Functional epoxy vitrimers and composites. Prog. 
Mater. Sci. 120, 100710 (2021). 
33. 
Liu, T. et al. A Self-Healable High Glass Transition Temperature Bioepoxy Material 
Based on Vitrimer Chemistry. Macromolecules 51, 5577–5585 (2018). 
34. 
Zhang, X. et al. Novel Phosphazene-Based flame retardant polyimine vitrimers with 
Monomer-Recovery and high performances. Chem. Eng. J. 440, 135806 (2022). 
35. 
Borges, C. S. P. et al. Effect of Water Ingress on the Mechanical and Chemical Properties 
of Polybutylene Terephthalate Reinforced with Glass Fibers. Materials 14, 1261 (2021). 
36. 
Daepp, M. I. G. et al. Eclipse: An End-to-End Platform for Low-Cost, Hyperlocal 
Environmental Sensing in Cities. in 2022 21st ACM/IEEE International Conference on 
Information Processing in Sensor Networks (IPSN) 28–40 (2022). 
doi:10.1109/IPSN54338.2022.00010. 
37. 
Hollins, O. Executive Summary: An assessment of the greenhouse gas  emissions and 
waste impacts from improving the repairability of Microsoft devices. 

34 
38. 
Wu, P., Liu, L. & Wu, Z. A transesterification-based epoxy vitrimer synthesis enabled 
high crack self-healing efficiency to fibrous composites. Compos. Part Appl. Sci. Manuf. 162, 
107170 (2022). 
39. 
Zhang, D. & Huang, Y. Influence of surface roughness and bondline thickness on the 
bonding performance of epoxy adhesive joints on mild steel substrates. Prog. Org. Coat. 153, 
106135 (2021). 
40. 
DuPont. Recovery of Tetrahydrofuran (THF). 
41. 
Hubbard, A. M. et al. Vitrimer Transition Temperature Identification: Coupling Various 
Thermomechanical Methodologies. ACS Appl. Polym. Mater. 3, 1756–1766 (2021). 
42. 
Tian, X., Stranks, S. D. & You, F. Life cycle assessment of recycling strategies for 
perovskite photovoltaic modules. Nat. Sustain. 4, 821–829 (2021). 
43. 
IPC-7711C/7721C Rework, Modification and Repair of Electronic Assemblies. (2017). 
44. 
IPC TM-650 Test Methods Manual. IPC International, Inc. https://www.ipc.org/test-
methods. 
 
 

35 
Acknowledgments 
We thank T. Cheng for discussion, Z. Englhardt for help with Bluetooth coding, B. Kuykendall 
for the use of mechanical testers, C. Li for feedback on the figures, K. Liao and M.Parker for help 
with flammability testing, and H. Wang for help with composite fabrication. We also thank D. 
Baker, F. Newman, and C. Toskey for help with sputter coating and copper plating. This research 
is funded by the Microsoft Climate Research Initiative. 
 
Author Information 
Authors and Affiliations 
Paul G. Allen School of Computer Science & Engineering, University of Washington, Seattle, 
WA, USA 
Zhihan Zhang, Jake A. Smith, Bichlien H. Nguyen, Shwetak Patel & Vikram Iyer 
 
Department of Mechanical Engineering, University of Washington, Seattle, WA, USA 
Agni K. Biswal, Ankush Nandi & Aniruddh Vashisth 
 
Microsoft Research, Redmond, WA, USA  
Kali Frost, Jake A. Smith & Bichlien H. Nguyen 
Corresponding author 
Correspondence to Aniruddh Vashisth or Vikram Iyer. 

36 
Contributions 
Z.Z., B.H.N., A.V. and V.I. conceptualized, organized and structured the work. Z.Z., A.K.B. and 
A.N. fabricated glass fiber reinforced vitrimer composites. Z.Z. manufactured vitrimer-based PCB 
and conducted characterizations. Z.Z. designed the hardware system, experiments and evaluations. 
Z.Z., J.A.S., and B.H.N. designed the repair experiments and evaluations. Z.Z., A.K.B., J.A.S., 
B.H.N. and A.V. designed the recycling experiments and evaluations. Z.Z. and A.K.B conducted 
material characterizations. K.F. conducted the life-cycle assessment analysis. Z.Z. and V.I. wrote 
the manuscript. All authors contributed to the study concept and experimental methods, discussed 
the results and edited the manuscript. 
 
Ethics declarations 
Competing interests 
K.F., J.A.S., and B.H.N. are employees of Microsoft Corporation. S.P. is a Google employee. Z.Z., 
A.K.B., A.N., A.V. and V.I. declare no competing interests. 
 

37 
Extended data figures and tables 
Extended Data Fig. 1 Dynamic mechanical analysis of pristine vitrimer and recycled vitrimer 
 
a, b, c, Normalized stress relaxation curves of pristine vitrimer (a), vitrimer after one recycling 
cycle (b), and vitrimer after two recycling cycles (c) at temperatures ranging from 140 °C to 240 °C. 
In all cases increasing temperature results in faster stress relaxation. d, e, f, Characterized storage 
modulus, loss modulus, and tan delta of pristine vitrimer (d), vitrimer after one recycling cycle (e), 
and vitrimer after two recycling cycles (f).  
 

38 
Extended Data Fig. 2 Peel strength for laminates with a layer of partially cured vitrimer 
 
a, b, Curves of the peeling force per width of copper-clad versus displacement for laminates with 
a layer of partially cured vitrimer after thermal stress (a), and at 125 °C (b) compared to the PCB 
standard of FR-4. 
 

39 
Extended Data Fig. 3 Joint strength of repaired via holes in GFRV 
 
a, Photograph showing the joint strength testing setup. Specimen is centered on a metal hollow 
cylinder support with a support span of 16 mm. b, Characterized shear stress of repaired via holes 
in GFRV compared to the repaired holes in FR-4 using super glue. c, Photograph of FR-4 after 
shear punch, showing cyanoacrylate glue bond broke. d, Photograph of GFRV after shear punch, 
showing the repaired via hole was deformed into a funnel-shape under the force of punch but 
remained intact, indicating a stronger interface at the hole boundary. 
 

40 
Extended Data Fig. 4 Solvents test for GFRV recycling 
 
GFRV samples were cut into rectangular shapes and immersed in various solutions (Acetone, 
CHCl3, DMF, THF); the top, middle and bottom photos were taken immediately after immersing, 
after 48 hours, and after 96 hours, respectively. 
 

41 
Extended Data Fig. 5 Characterized storage modulus, tan delta, retention of storage modulus, and 
vitrimer transition temperature of recycled vitrimer 
 
a, Characterized storage modulus temperature sweep results of vitrimer after one and two recycling 
cycles compared to pristine. The storage modulus shows a slight decrease after recycling. b, Tan 
delta temperature sweep results of vitrimer after one and two recycling cycles compared to pristine, 
tan delta broadens and the left shift of peaks is negligible after recycling. c, Retention of storage 
modulus (N = 3, error bars = ±𝜎) of vitrimer after one and two recycling cycles compared to pristine. 
d, Tv comparison of pristine vitrimer, vitrimer after one and two recycling cycles, indicating the 
shift of Tv is negligible after recycling. The Arrhenius plot is derived with a linear fit to the low-
temperature region (140 °C to 180 °C), and its intersection with where the stress-relaxation 
constant is 10^6 indicates the Tv. 
 

42 
Extended Data Fig. 6 Characterized electrical and mechanical properties of reformed GFRV 
 
a, b, c, Characterized dielectric constant (a), flexural strength (b), volume resistivity (c), and loss 
tangent (d) of reformed GFRV compared to virgin composite (N ≥ 3 (a, c, d) and N = 1000 (c), 
error bars = ±𝜎). 
 

43 
Extended Data Fig. 7 Environmental impact of vPCB freight 
Comparison of the environmental impact of vPCB freight versus conventional FR-4 prepreg 
freight across 11 different categories. 
 

44 
Extended Data Fig. 8 Global warming potential impact breakdown of conventional FR-4 PCB 
 
Detailed contributions in kg CO2 equivalents to global warming potential for conventional FR-4 
PCB. 
