Scattering-Based Structural Inversion of Soft Materials via
Kolmogorov-Arnold Networks
Chi-Huan Tung,1 Lijie Ding,1 Ming-Ching Chang,2 Guan-Rong Huang,3 Lionel Porcar,4 Yangyang Wang,5
Jan-Michael Y. Carrillo,5 Bobby G. Sumpter,5 Yuya Shinohara,6 Changwoo Do,1 and Wei-Ren Chen1
1)Neutron Scattering Division, Oak Ridge National Laboratory, Oak Ridge, 37831, Tennessee,
United States
2)Department of Computer Science, University at Albany - State University of New York, Albany, 12222, New York,
United States
3)Department of Engineering and System Science, National Tsing Hua University, Hsinchu 30013,
Taiwan
4)Institut Laue-Langevin, B.P. 156, F-38042 Grenoble Cedex 9, France
5)Center for Nanophase Materials Sciences, Oak Ridge National Laboratory, Oak Ridge, 37831, Tennessee,
United States
6)Materials Science and Technology Division, Oak Ridge National Laboratory, Oak Ridge, 37831, Tennessee,
United States
(*Electronic mail: chenw@ornl.gov)
(*Electronic mail: sumpterbg@ornl.gov)
(Dated: 23 December 2024)
Small-angle scattering (SAS) techniques are indispensable tools for probing the structure of soft materials. However,
traditional analytical models often face limitations in structural inversion for complex systems, primarily due to the
absence of closed-form expressions of scattering functions. To address these challenges, we present a machine learning
framework based on the Kolmogorov-Arnold Network (KAN) for directly extracting real-space structural informa-
tion from scattering spectra in reciprocal space. This model-independent, data-driven approach provides a versatile
solution for analyzing intricate configurations in soft matter. By applying the KAN to lyotropic lamellar phases and
colloidal suspensions—two representative soft matter systems—we demonstrate its ability to accurately and efficiently
resolve structural collectivity and complexity. Our findings highlight the transformative potential of machine learning
in enhancing the quantitative analysis of soft materials, paving the way for robust structural inversion across diverse
systems.
I.
INTRODUCTION
Small-angle scattering (SAS) techniques, such as small-
angle neutron scattering (SANS) and small-angle X-ray scat-
tering (SAXS), are indispensable tools for characterizing the
structures of soft materials1. These techniques provide crit-
ical insights into the structural arrangement of complex sys-
tems, including polymers, surfactants, and colloidal suspen-
sions, by measuring scattered intensities as a function of the
wave vector Q.
The inverse problem in SAS involves ex-
tracting real-space structural information from these scatter-
ing patterns in reciprocal space. To achieve this, the scatter-
ing function must be modeled as parameters that represent the
real-space structure of the system, typically through analytical
approximations2, to facilitate regression analysis.
However, many important systems exhibit structures that
cannot be captured accurately by traditional analytical mod-
els. In these cases, the complexity of the system’s arrange-
ment and the limitations of existing models create signif-
icant challenges for extracting real-space information.
To
overcome these challenges, we have developed various ma-
chine learning algorithms as mathematical frameworks for
parameter inversion, bypassing the need for explicit analyti-
cal modeling3–10. These machine learning approaches have
shown great potential in precisely obtaining physical infor-
mation from controlled test data. However, when applied to
real experimental data, they often encounter practical issues.
For instance, the convolutional neural network (CNN) used
discrete transposed-convolution operations to produce the Q-
dependent features in the scattering spectrum, which necessi-
tate a regular grid of evenly spaced Q-values. In contrast, real
experimental data often exhibit unevenly spaced Q points due
to variations in instrument configurations, collimation condi-
tions, and other experimental factors.
To address these challenges, we propose a feature gener-
ation framework based on the Kolmogorov-Arnold Network
(KAN)11. The framework leverages the Kolmogorov-Arnold
representation theorem12,13, which guarantees the existence of
a continuous, smooth representation of multivariate functions.
In the context of this theorem, the KAN model generates a
continuous and differentiable scattering function that closely
approximates scattering functions. This approach overcomes
the limitations imposed by fixed-point output in conventional
neural network models that relying on convolution operations,
making it a powerful tool for SAS analysis, particularly when
dealing with experimental data characterized by irregular and
unevenly distributed Q-points.
In this paper, we demonstrate the efficacy of the KAN-
based function optimized for least square regression routine
through two case studies. First, we apply the framework to
the analysis of defective lamellar phases, illustrating how it
can resolve structural distortions and quantify topological de-
fect distributions. Second, we explore charged colloidal sus-
pensions, where KAN successfully maps structure factors to
arXiv:2412.15474v1  [cond-mat.soft]  20 Dec 2024

2
effective interaction potentials, showing excellent agreement
with both experimental data and molecular dynamics simula-
tion results.
This work establishes KAN as a transformative tool for
structural inversion in soft materials, providing a powerful al-
ternative to traditional analytical models, and demonstrates its
application in analyzing experimental data through curve fit-
ting. The ability of the KAN to handle complex, real-world
experimental data positions it as a crucial tool for advancing
the quantitative spectral analysis of soft matter systems.
The remainder of this paper is organized as follows. In
Section II, we present the methods used to develop the KAN-
based generative function for scattering intensity. In Section
III, we describe the application of the framework to the two
case studies: defective lamellar phases and charged colloidal
suspensions. Finally, in Section IV, we discuss the results and
conclude with a summary of the work and potential future di-
rections.
II.
METHODS
A.
Kolmogorov-Arnold Network (KAN)
FIG. 1. A general setup of the KAN model setup for scattering func-
tions. The model starts with input parameters [λ1,λ2,λ3], which pass
through KAN layers (KAN 1) to generate latent variables z. These
are then combined with Q and processed by another set of KAN lay-
ers (KAN 2) to produce the final scattering intensity IKAN(Q).
We choose to use KAN11, a versatile generative model that
produces a continuous function for coherent scattering inten-
sity I(Q). This approach overcomes the limitations of fixed-
output CNN models, offering greater flexibility and better
adaptability to real-world scattering data. Grounded in the
Kolmogorov-Arnold representation theorem12,13, KAN ex-
presses any multivariate continuous function as a finite sum
of univariate functions of input variables.
In this frame-
work, the multivariate Q-dependent scattering function is rep-
resented directly by simpler univariate components, avoiding
the need for discrete convolution operations. Consequently,
KAN eliminates the requirement for a fixed output grid, mak-
ing it particularly well-suited for evaluating scattering inten-
sities I(Q) at arbitrary Q-points, aligning seamlessly with ex-
perimental data.
The Kolmogorov-Arnold theorem13 posits that any mul-
tivariate continuous function can be decomposed into a su-
perposition of simpler univariate continuous functions. This
decomposition facilitates the simplification of complex func-
tions into more manageable components:
f(x1,...,xn) =
2n+1
∑
q=1
χq
 
n
∑
p=1
ψ pq(xp)
!
,
(1)
where f(x1,...,xn) represents the multivariate continuous
function, and χq and ψ pq are univariate functions. Eqn. 1
serves as a minimal example of two-layer KAN takes n in-
puts and produce one output. This nested structure can be ex-
tended to arbitrary depths and widths by adjusting the number
of layers and the neurons within each layer.
The KAN-based generative model for SAS is depicted in
Fig. 1. This model offers a more robust and flexible approach
for regression analysis, especially when dealing with exper-
imental scattering data. Similar to CNNs, the model begins
with input parameters [λ1,λ2,λ3,...], which pass through an
initial set of KAN layers (KAN 1) to generate latent variable
set z. To ensure that the output I(Q) explicitly depends on Q,
these latent variables are then combined with Q and processed
through a second set of KAN layers (KAN 2) to produce the
final output. Both KAN layers, as shown in Fig. 1, consist
of nested, trainable functions parameterized by splines14. The
training process of spline coefficients is achieved by optimiz-
ing the spline coefficients to minimize the errors of KAN out-
put using the batch optimization algorithm via backpropaga-
tion as described in our previous work10.
Unlike
CNNs,
which
are
constrained
by
discrete
transposed-convolution
operations
that
producing
dis-
crete grid-based operations, KAN guarantees expressiveness
through the Kolmogorov-Arnold representation theorem.
Additionally, it avoids the checkerboard artifacts often caused
by compounded transposed convolution layers15.
On the
other hand, the smoothness of KAN with respect to Q is
controlled through the selection of spline bases, which utilize
piecewise low-degree polynomials with continuous deriva-
tives.
This approach ensures that the output values within
each segment remain within a controlled range, effectively
minimizing the potential for large oscillations. As a result,
KAN generates the scattering intensity I(Q) as a smooth
and continuous function over any chosen Q-points, without
requiring interpolation. The flexibility of the KAN model can
be fine-tuned by adjusting its depth, width, and the number of
spline knots, depending on the complexity of the relationship
between the parameters, Q, and I(Q).
Note that Fig. 1 only provides a general example of the
KAN model setup for scattering functions. The detailed net-
work architecture and the preparation of training sets for dif-
ferent soft matter systems in each specific scattering case
study will be presented in the next section.
B.
Least Square Curve Fitting
With KAN’s capability to generate scattering functions
based on given parameters, we can construct a least-squares
curve-fitting algorithm to extract physical information from
scattering experiments.

3
Algorithm 1 outlines a general iterative approach to grad-
ually update the fitting parameters and the KAN-generated
scattering function to align with the experimentally measured
Iexp(Q). At each step, the regression loss Lfit is evaluated,
with the goal of minimizing it until a predefined convergence
condition is met. The core mechanism driving the parameter
updates in this algorithm is a minimization algorithm. There
are a variety of algorithms that can accomplish the task of pa-
rameter optimization, some of which, such as Quasi-Newton
methods, rely on the gradient of the target function. This re-
liance poses limitations, particularly for CNNs, as their use as
the foundation of gradient-based optimization algorithms in
data analysis is hindered by the complexity introduced by acti-
vation functions between CNN layers. These activation func-
tions make it challenging to compute the numerical derivatives
of I(Q) with respect to the input parameters, reducing the fea-
sibility of using CNNs in such applications. In contrast, since
the KAN model only consists of additive operations on uni-
variate continuous functions represented as splines, it allows
for more efficient gradient evaluation. This capability unlocks
the potential to utilize various numerical minimization meth-
ods, making KAN a more versatile choice for optimization
tasks.
Algorithm 1 Least Squares Curve Fitting.
This algorithm performs parameter extraction by fitting the
experimental intensity data Iexp(Q) with a model fKAN(Q,λ)
generated curve using the least squares method. The algo-
rithm iteratively updates them to minimize the loss function
Lfit. A minimization algorithm is used to update λ at each it-
eration. Upon convergence, the optimized parameters λML are
returned as the result.
Require: Iexp(Q) (experimental intensity),
fKAN(Q,λ) (KAN
model function), λ0 (initial guesses), MaxIter (maximum iter-
ations), Lc (convergence threshold)
1: Initialize λ = {λi;i = 1···N} ←λ0
2: Set iteration counter i ←0
3: while i < MaxIter do
4:
Compute IKAN(Q) ←fKAN(Q,λ)
5:
Compute the loss function:
Lfit ←∑
Q
Iexp(Q)−IKAN(Q)
2
6:
Update λ using a minimization algorithm to reduce Lfit
7:
Increment iteration counter: i ←i+1
8:
if Lfit < Lc then
9:
Set λML ←λ
10:
break
11:
end if
12: end while
13: return λML
III.
RESULTS AND DISCUSSION
To demonstrate the feasibility of applying KAN to the in-
verse problem of soft matter structure characterization via
SAS, we have deployed the least square curve fitting algo-
rithm, Algorithm 1, based on KAN architectures designed for
two representative classes of soft materials: lamellar phases
and colloidal suspensions. In the following, a detailed de-
scription of the KAN architecture is provided.
A.
Defective Lamellar Phases
Lamellar phases are commonly encountered in numerous
soft materials and biological systems such as block copoly-
mers, surfactants, and liquid crystals. SAS techniques have
been extensively used to characterize lamellar structures. An-
alytical models of scattering functions16–23 assume perfect
lamellar ordering, effective when layers remain uninterrupted.
However, topological defects, often revealed by techniques
like nuclear magnetic resonance24–33, transmission electron
microscopy34–45, and conductivity measurements46–50, fre-
quently distort the layers, challenging the ideal model.
In analytical models, such as those assuming a square-wave
density profile, the presence of perforations or crumpled sur-
faces in distorted lamellar phases is not explicitly accounted
for.
These phases can exhibit features similar to sponge-
like structures, suggesting the need for a model that bridges
the gap between ideal lamellar and sponge phases, with such
transitions being controlled by the wave vector distribution.
We propose a conformational descriptor for defective lamellar
phases based on a wave field representation10. In this frame-
work, we have demonstrated that the structure of defective
lamellar phases can be uniquely characterized by three param-
eters: σk, which represents the standard deviation of the wave
vector in the wave field that models the density fluctuation of
lamellar phases; Γ, which quantifies the degree of symmetry
in the ordering of lamellar phases; and α, which measures the
volume ratio of amphiphilic molecules to water.
Within this descriptive context, solving the inverse scatter-
ing problem becomes more complex in terms of analytical
modeling due to the highly non-linear relationship between
the scattering function and these three parameters. To over-
come these difficulties, we propose a machine learning ap-
proach based on Fig. 1 to establish a generative function for
scattering intensity as a function of these three parameters. A
comprehensive library of two-point correlation functions for
lamellar phases is constructed to train the generative KAN,
thereby facilitating the inversion of real-space conformations
from experimental scattering data.
Fig.
2
illustrates
the
KAN-based
architecture
de-
signed to reconstruct the logarithmic scattering intensity,
lnI(Q ˜d;σk,Γ,α), as a function of the wavevector Q and
structural parameters σk, Γ, and α.
This architecture em-
ploys the Kolmogorov-Arnold representation theorem to
decompose the complex multivariate mapping into sums and
compositions of univariate functions, implemented through a
hierarchical neural network.
The input layer consists of the structural parameters σk, Γ,
α. These inputs are processed by KAN 1, which maps the
input space to an intermediate feature space through layers
containing 3, 7, and 3 neurons, respectively. KAN 2 trans-
forms the features from KAN 1 to predict the scattering in-

4
FIG. 2. KAN-based generative function for scattering intensity of
defective lamellar phases. The network consists of two stages: KAN
1 (left) processes input parameters σk, Γ, α, and Q ˜d through hidden
layers with spline-based connections, each of the connecting curve
are specified by the coefficients of spline functions. The output from
KAN 1 feeds into KAN 2 (right), which further refines the features
to predict the scattering intensity, lnI(Q ˜d;σk,Γ,α), after combining
with the reference intensity, lnI +ref. The network architecture cap-
tures the nonlinear relationships between structural parameters and
scattering profiles, enabling the inversion of experimental data by al-
gorithm 1.
tensity and incorporate the dependence on scaled wavevector
Q ˜d, where ˜d represents the average inter-planar spacing. This
stage reduces the dimensionality progressively with layers
containing 9, 1, and 1 neuron, ultimately outputting a scalar
value, lnI(Q ˜d;σk,Γ,α). The final function linking the output
lnI(Q ˜d;σk,Γ,α) to its parent node serves as a flexible buffer-
ing, ensuring more numerically stable generation of the os-
cillating features in lamellar scattering functions. Each curve
connecting two nodes correspond to one univariate function
represented by spline, providing flexibility in modeling the
interactions among structural parameters.
One of the feature of the spline basis within the KAN lay-
ers is their natural tendency to produce outputs that oscillate
around zero14. To capitalize on this property, a standardiza-
tion process using a suitably chosen baseline function signifi-
cantly enhances the model’s ability to identify and emphasize
critical variations in scattering data.
In the training set10, the scattering intensity lnI(Q ˜d)
evolves systematically with variations in σk, Γ, and α.
While no simple analytical expressions exist for these varia-
tions, their trends suggest that preprocessing the training data
through a linear algebra approach is both feasible and benefi-
cial.
Providing the training set {λtrain,Itrain}, with shape of
Ntrain × 3 and Ntrain × NQ, the standardization process begins
with a linear approximation for any 1×3 input parameter λ:
lnIλ = (λA+B)⊤,
where the matrices A and B are determined from the training
set as follows:
A =

λ ⊤
trainλtrain
−1
λ ⊤
trainItrain,
(2)
B =
1
Ntrain
Ntrain
∑
i=1
[Itrain −λtrainA]i.
(3)
Here, A is an 3 × NQ matrix, and B is 1 × NQ, where NQ is
the number of training set Q-values. For any input parameter
vector λ, the corresponding intensity lnIλ of length NQ can
then be computed at the fixed Q-sampling points.
To accommodate arbitrary Q-values within the range of the
training set, variations in the referential intensity, Iref(Q), are
modeled using the following quadratic approximation:
lnIref(Q) = C⊤XQ,
where the 3×1 coefficients C are determined as:
C =

X⊤
trainXtrain
−1
X⊤
train lnIλ.
(4)
The matrix Xtrain is defined as:
Xtrain =


Q2
train,1
Qtrain,1
1
...
...
...
Q2
train,NQ Qtrain,NQ 1

,
(5)
and XQ for any specific Q-value is given by:
XQ =

Q2 Q 1

.
(6)
The final preprocessed training data to be reproduced by
KAN in Fig. 2 is obtained by subtracting the reference loga-
rithmic intensity:
lnI(Q ˜d)−lnIref(Q).
FIG. 3. (a) Scattering intensity I(Q) as a function of the rescaled
wave vector Q ˜d, where the training data Itrain (dots) and the reference
intensity Iref (dashed lines) are shown for varying levels of structural
distortion parameter α. The color gradient corresponds to increasing
values of α. (b) Standardized intensity I(Q)/Iref(Q), where devia-
tions from unity highlight residual differences caused by structural
distortions. The standardization effectively normalizes the data, al-
lowing the KAN model to capture and reconstruct variations in scat-
tering intensity with high accuracy.
The implementation of this standardization process is illus-
trated in Fig. 3. Panel (a) shows the scattering intensity I(Q)
as a function of the rescaled wave vector Q ˜d, where training
data Itrain (dots) are compared with the reference intensity Iref

5
(dashed lines) across increasing levels of the structural distor-
tion parameter α. The gradual deviations from Iref highlight
the impact of α on the scattering profiles. Panel (b) displays
the standardized intensity I(Q)/Iref(Q), where fluctuations
around unity emphasize the residual differences due to struc-
tural distortions. This normalization ensures the KAN model
robustly identifies and reconstructs variations in scattering in-
tensities across the training set.
The KAN model is then
trained to capture the relations between Itrain and {σk,Γ,α}
in the training set10.
FIG. 4. SANS intensity, I(Q ˜d), for aqueous solutions of sodium
dioctyl sulfosuccinate (AOT) at 30%, 40%, and 50% concentrations,
presented in dimensionless units with Q ˜d as the key parameter. The
symbols and the lines represent the experimental data and the KAN
model, respectively. The average inter-plane distance, ˜d, is estimated
as 2π
˜Q , where ˜Q is the position of the first correlation peak. As AOT
concentration increases, the first correlation peak decreases in height
and shifts to higher Q values, with distinct changes in lamellar struc-
tural organization, particularly in the second correlation peak.
We assess the feasibility of applying the KAN model to al-
gorithm 1 for SAS data analysis of defective lamellar systems.
To this end, we choose of a well-established lyotropic system,
sodium dioctyl sulfosuccinate (AOT)51, as example.
AOT
molecules were dispersed in deuterium oxide (D2O) to pre-
pare aqueous solutions with concentrations of 30%, 40%, and
50% by weight. SANS measurements were carried out on the
D22 small-angle diffractometer at the Institut Laue-Langevin
(ILL), employing two neutron wavelengths (6 Å and 11.5 Å)
to cover a Q-range from 0.001 Å−1 to 0.5 Å−1, capturing co-
herent neutron scattering.
Fig. 4 presents the SANS intensity, I(Q ˜d), for aqueous so-
lutions containing 30%, 40%, and 50% AOT. The intensity
is plotted in dimensionless Q ˜d. As the AOT weight fraction
increases, qualitative trends indicate a reduction in the height
of the first correlation peak in I(Q ˜d) for Q ˜d ∼1 and a shift
in its position towards higher Q ˜d values. These changes sug-
gest modifications in the structural organization of the lamel-
lar phases, consistent with the AOT/water phase diagram51.
Additionally, variations in the height and width of the second
correlation peak in I(Q ˜d) further reflect these conformational
evolutions.
Quantitative analysis shows that experimental data (sym-
bols) strongly agree with the KAN model (black curves) in
the high-Q regime, particularly for Q ˜d ≳1, with minor devia-
tions near the second correlation peak at Q ˜d ∼2. In contrast,
significant discrepancies arise in the low-Q regime (Q ˜d < 1),
where the experimental data flatten, while the KAN model
predicts an upturn in I(Q ˜d) that diminishes with increasing
AOT concentration.
The origins of these discrepancies can be explored within
the wave field representation10 for distorted lamellar phases.
Instrument resolution, addressed in prior work52, is unlikely
the source. In the high Q ˜d region, we hypothesize that minor
discrepancies stem from the ansatz used to quantify the wave
vector distribution, particularly regarding the formulation of
P(k). An alternative approach, involving a zero mean but non-
zero second and fourth moments53, contrasts with our method,
which assumes a non-zero mean54.
Additionally, a more general formulation for P(θ), based
on different Legendre polynomials55, could allow greater flex-
ibility in describing detailed angular dispersion.
This ap-
proach, however, would introduce more parameters, requiring
a larger training dataset and increasing computational cost, re-
flecting the "curse of dimensionality"56.
The low Q disagreement may result from sample loading
affecting grain orientation distributions in AOT solutions. As
noted by Kekicheff et al.57, this process can alter the orien-
tational distribution of grains in lamellar phases, influencing
low-Q scattering. In contrast, a sponge phase is unaffected by
loading, explaining why discrepancies are most noticeable in
30% AOT solutions, less so in 40% AOT, and virtually absent
in 50% AOT solutions with sponge-like topology.
FIG. 5. Three-dimensional visualization of the structures derived
from the extracted values of σk, Γ, and α for (a) 30%, (b) 40%, and
(c) 50% AOT/water solutions. The inter-planar spacing is on the or-
der of tens of Å. As the AOT weight fraction increases, pathways be-
tween adjacent plates emerge, enhancing the interlayer connectivity.
This progression leads to the transformation of initially anisotropic,
two-dimensional plate structures into a more isotropic phase at the
mesoscopic scale.
From the values of σk, Γ, and α, a three-dimensional
wave field representation of lamellar structure (Fig. 5) is con-
structed. As AOT concentration increases, pathways between

6
adjacent plates develop, transitioning from anisotropic plates
to a more isotropic phase. Real-space renderings of these dis-
torted lamellar phases, including inter-layer distances and in-
plane correlation lengths, are presented in Fig. 5, with further
details in Ref.10.
B.
Charged Colloidal Suspensions
The stability of charged colloidal suspensions is governed
by the interplay between electrostatic screening and van der
Waals forces, as described by the classical Derjaguin-Landau-
Verwey-Overbeek (DLVO) theory58. The electrostatic inter-
actions comprise a repulsive force from the overlap of ionic
double layers and an attractive Hamaker interaction, typically
on the order of kBT, where kB is the Boltzmann constant and
T the temperature. Double-layer repulsion often dominates in
low ionic strength systems, influencing particle arrangement
via long-range interactions. According to scattering theory,
interactions decaying faster than 1/r are short-ranged, while
those decaying as 1/r or slower, such as electric double-layer
forces, are long-ranged59.
The screened Coulomb repulsion in charged colloids is
commonly modeled by a Yukawa potential derived from the
Debye-Hückel equation58:
β VR(r) =



∞,
if r < D,
Aexp[−κ(r −D)]
r
,
otherwise,
(7)
where β = 1/kBT, and the potential strength A depends on the
charge number Z, the electric charge e, solvent dielectric con-
stant ε, inverse Debye length κ, and colloid diameter D. The
Yukawa potential effectively captures the electrostatic behav-
ior of diverse charged colloidal systems, providing insights
into their properties and interactions.
SAS is a vital technique for probing the effective interpar-
ticle potential VR(r), with Henderson’s theorem linking this
potential to static correlation functions such as the structure
factor S(Q) and the radial distribution function g(r)60–62. The
inversion of S(Q) to VR(r) is traditionally approached through
integral equation (IE) theories, such as the Ornstein-Zernike
(OZ) equation63,64:
h(r12) = c(r12)+np
Z
c(r13)h(r23)d3r3,
(8)
where h(r12) ≡g(r12)−1, c(r12) is the direct correlation func-
tion, and np is the particle number density. Here, S(Q) is
the Fourier transform of g(r). Solving Eqn. (8) requires a
closure equation, but common closures—such as the mean
spherical approximation (MSA)65, rescaled MSA (RMSA)66,
and penetrating-background RMSA (PB-RMSA)67—struggle
with highly concentrated or strongly charged systems1,68–70.
While the modified PB-RMSA (MPB-RMSA)70 improves ac-
curacy, it faces convergence issues for 1/κD < 0.1 or φ > 0.3
and becomes computationally inefficient at high volume frac-
tions.
Other closures, such as the hypernetted chain (HNC) and
Percus-Yevick (PY) approximations71, systematically devi-
ate: HNC underestimates S(Q), while PY overestimates it72.
The Rogers-Young (RY) closure73 performs better for moder-
ately charged systems but remains computationally demand-
ing and lacks robust convergence.74 In strongly coupled sys-
tems with intense colloidal and counterion interactions, IE
theories fail entirely,75 highlighting their limitations for in-
verting VR(r) in complex, collective systems.76
This report contends that achieving a perfect closure for
solving the inverse scattering problem is unattainable. The
pursuit of another analytically complex closure is unlikely to
resolve this challenge. Instead, we propose a machine learn-
ing approach based on the KAN, which exploits the expres-
sive power of scattering functions to establish a direct and ef-
ficient mapping between scattering data and potential param-
eters. As demonstrated in the inverse problem of defective
lamellar phases, this method provides a promising regression
framework for analyzing S(Q) in charged colloidal suspen-
sions.
In the context of Eqn. (8), the structure factor S(Q) can be
expressed as64,71:
S(Q) =
1
1−φ ˜c(Q),
(9)
where ˜c(Q) is the Fourier transform of the direct correlation
function c(r) as defined in Eqn. (8).
Similarly to the case study of defective lamellar phases, it
is necessary to identify a referential system to facilitate the
KAN-based generative function. For this purpose, the hard
sphere (HS) system is selected, as it represents an asymptotic
limit for charged colloidal suspensions when 1/κD →0 and
A →03. Using the PY closure71, the structure factor S(Q) of
HS systems, derived from solving Eqn. (8), takes the follow-
ing form77:
S(Q,R,φ) =
1
1+24φ GHS(K)
K
,
(10)
where K = 2QR, and GHS(K) is given by:
GHS(K) = α sinK −K cosK
K2
+β 2K sinK +(2−K2)cosK −2
K3
+γ −K4 cosK
K5
+γ 4

(3K2 −6)cosK +(K3 −6K)sinK +6

K5
.
(11)
The following expressions define the parameters α, β, and γ:
α = (1+2φ)2
(1−φ)4 ,
(12)
β = −6(1+φ/2)2
(1−φ)4 ,
(13)

7
γ = φ(1+2η)2
(1−φ)4 .
(14)
Based on this representation, we can train the KAN to capture
the differences between the Yukawa potential ˜c(Q) and that of
the referential HS system. The S(Q) can then be expressed as:
SKAN(Q,R,φ) =
1
1+24φ GHS(K)+∆G(K)
K
+ f3(K)
,
(15)
where ∆G(K) represents the deviation from the hard sphere
model, and f3(K) is an additional correction term.
FIG. 6. Panel (a) compares the direct correlation function from the
MD-generated training set (red circles) with the hard sphere (HS)
system (cyan dashed curve), highlighting oscillations in the discrep-
ancy ∆G(K) at lower Q. The direct correlation function is modeled as
˜cKAN(K) = −24 GHS(K)+∆G(K)
K
+ f3(K)
φ
, and the KAN-generated re-
sult (black solid curve) shows excellent agreement with the MD data.
In Fig. 7 (b), the static structure factor S(Q) from MD simulations
(red symbols) is compared with the KAN predictions (black solid
lines) across a range of volume fractions φ, demonstrating quantita-
tive agreement and confirming the KAN’s accuracy and efficiency in
regression analysis for charged colloidal suspensions.
Fig. 6 (a) illustrates the direct correlation function gener-
ated from the molecular dynamics (MD)-generated training
set (red circles) in comparison with the results from a hard
sphere (HS) system characterized by the same volume fraction
φ and particle radius R (cyan dashed curve). It is evident from
observation that the discrepancy ∆G(K) exhibits pronounced
oscillations at lower wave vectors Q. To describe this behav-
ior, we model ∆G(K) as:
∆G(K) = f1(K)sin(f2(K))/K,
(16)
where f1(K) and f2(K) represent functional dependencies on
the wave vector. Based on this relationship, the direct correla-
tion function is expressed as:
˜cKAN(K) = −24GHS(K)+∆G(K)
K
+ f3(K)
φ
.
(17)
Here, GHS(K) corresponds to the direct correlation function
of the hard sphere reference system, and f3(K) introduces an
additional correction term dependent on the volume fraction
φ.
FIG. 7. Kolmogorov-Arnold Network (KAN) architecture for regres-
sion analysis of scattering data. The input parameters (φ, 1/κD, lnA,
QD) are mapped through two sub-networks (KAN 1 and KAN 2) to
predict correction terms f1, f2, and f3. The number of neurons in
each layer is indicated.
The KAN architecture shown in Fig. 7 illustrates a gener-
ative function for building SKAN in Eqn. 15. The input layer
consists of four parameters: the volume fraction φ, the in-
verse screening length 1/κD, the logarithmic amplitude lnA,
and the dimensionless scaled wave vector QD. These serve
as key descriptors that encode the physical characteristics of
the system. The architecture is split into two connected sub-
networks, KAN 1 and KAN 2, with intermediate layers pro-
gressively increasing the number of neurons from 3 to 7, and
subsequently transitioning to 3(+1), 9, and finally 3 neurons.
This hierarchical design enables the network to capture intri-
cate nonlinear relationships between the input parameters and
the outputs f1, f2, and f3, which represent correction terms
accounting for deviations from the HS referential model. By
systematically training the KAN using the training set3 con-
taining structure factor S(Q) and corresponding potential pa-
rameters, this architecture effectively maps the input physi-
cal parameters to the correction terms of inter-particle corre-
lation, thereby enhancing the model’s accuracy for describing
the charged repulsive colloidal systems. The black solid curve
in Fig. 6(a) represents the direct correlation function ˜cKAN(K)
generated by the KAN, showcasing excellent agreement with
the MD-generated data (red circles). This result highlights the
ability of the KAN to accurately reconstruct the direct corre-
lation function.
In Fig. 6(b), we further compare the static structure fac-
tor S(Q) obtained from an independent test set (red sym-
bols) with predictions from the optimized KAN (black solid
lines). The comparisons are performed across a range of vol-
ume fractions φ, spanning from 0.045 to 0.405.
Remark-
ably, the KAN-generated structure factors exhibit quantitative
agreement with the MD results across the entire probed range,
demonstrating the robustness and accuracy of the KAN frame-
work. These benchmarks demonstrate the KAN’s efficacy in
regression analysis for inverse problems in charged colloidal
suspensions, offering a numerically accurate and efficient tool

8
for analyzing soft matter systems.
Before proceeding, it is instructive to highlight the subtle
distinction between the strategy employed in the current train-
ing process for establishing the KAN regression framework
and our earlier machine learning approach for the potential in-
version of colloidal suspensions3,8,9. Unlike the previous ap-
proach, which directly links the evolution of potential param-
eters to the characteristic development of S(Q), the present
framework adopts a referential HS system. By addressing the
difference between the c(Q), which is more prominent in the
low-Q region, this method enables precise capture of the low-
Q coherent intensity. This property is crucial for determining
the compressibility of the probed system and, consequently,
the inter-colloidal effective interaction.
FIG. 8. (a) Scattering intensities, I(QD), of silica colloidal disper-
sions at various weight fractions: 1 wt% (black), 10 wt% (red), 20
wt% (blue), 30 wt% (green), and 40 wt% (purple). The particle di-
ameter, D, was determined to be 115 nm based on the regression of
the 1 wt% data. To enhance clarity, the I(QD) curves for each weight
fraction have been offset vertically. (b) The inverse of the radial dis-
tribution function, VR( r
D), derived from the regression of the I(QD)
data. The observed fluctuations in VR( r
D) reflect the experimental
uncertainty for each weight fraction.
Fig. 8(a) shows the SANS data (symbols) and the corre-
sponding KAN predictions in the dimensionless representa-
tion of QD. The particle diameter, D, was determined to be
115 nm with 6% polydispersity from 1 wt% dilute dispersions
(black symbols). At this polydispersity, the decoupling ap-
proximation can be used to calculate the scattering intensity
as
I(Q) = ⟨P(Q)⟩⟨S(Q)⟩,
(18)
where ⟨P(Q)⟩and ⟨S(Q)⟩are the form and structure factors,
respectively. The KAN-generated S(Q) was used for curve
fitting. The optimized I(QD) obtained from algorithm 1 align
well with the SANS data. Despite deviations near the struc-
tural peak increase at higher volume fractions due to the po-
tential multiple scattering effect, the form factor oscillation
shows that the approximation in Eqn. 18 remains valid for
spherical particles with low polydispersity (∼6%).
Fig. 8(b) presents the inverted VR( r
D) curves, which show
little variation across dispersions, with fluctuations within rea-
sonable uncertainties. The repulsive strength is seen to in-
crease upon increasing the silica weight fraction.
IV.
CONCLUSIONS
This work introduces a machine learning framework based
on the KAN to address the inverse problem in small-angle
scattering of soft materials. By leveraging the KAN’s abil-
ity to generate continuous functions, we successfully analyzed
two representative soft matter systems: defective lamellar
phases and charged colloidal suspensions. The KAN frame-
work overcomes key limitations of traditional models, includ-
ing the reliance on fixed Q grids and the introduction of in-
terpolation artifacts, while providing a robust and efficient ap-
proach to map structural parameters to scattering intensities
directly for curve fitting.
For defective lamellar phases, the KAN-based model effec-
tively captured the nonlinear relationships between structural
parameters (σk, Γ, α) and scattering intensity I(Q). This ca-
pability enabled the resolution of structural distortions and the
quantification of topological defect distributions. In the case
of charged colloidal suspensions, the KAN established a map-
ping between structure factors S(Q) and effective interaction
potentials, achieving excellent agreement with both molecular
dynamics simulations and experimental data. These findings
underscore the versatility and accuracy of the KAN frame-
work in reconstructing complex structural and interaction pro-
files in soft matter systems.
The application of the KAN framework to experimental
data highlights its potential to extract meaningful structural
insights while preserving the integrity of the data. Our results
demonstrate that the KAN approach outperforms traditional
analytical methods in both accuracy and adaptability, offer-
ing a robust alternative for analyzing scattering systems with
variable Q-point distributions.
Looking ahead, the KAN framework presents exciting op-
portunities for advancing scattering-based analysis. Its flex-
ibility to integrate additional physical constraints and extend
to dynamic scattering techniques, such as neutron spin echo
and x-ray photon correlation spectroscopy, offers a power-
ful avenue for probing non-equilibrium phenomena and time-
resolved processes in soft materials. By establishing the KAN
as a transformative tool for structural inversion, this work lays
the foundation for broader applications in the characterization
of materials with complex structures.
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
This research was performed at the Spallation Neutron
Source and the Center for Nanophase Materials Sciences,
which are DOE Office of Science User Facilities operated by
Oak Ridge National Laboratory. This research was sponsored
by the Laboratory Directed Research and Development Pro-
gram of Oak Ridge National Laboratory, managed by UT-
Battelle, LLC, for the U. S. Department of Energy and the
U.S. Department of Energy Office of Science, Office of Ba-
sic Energy Sciences, Data, Artificial Intelligence and Machine
Learning at DOE Scientific User Facilities Program under
Award Number 34532. Monte Carlo simulations and compu-
tations used resources of the Oak Ridge Leadership Comput-

9
ing Facility, which is supported by the DOE Office of Science
under Contract DE-AC05-00OR22725. Y.S. was supported
by the U.S. DOE, Office of Science, Basic Energy Sciences,
Materials Sciences and Engineering Division.
DATA AVAILABILITY STATEMENT
The data that support the findings of this study are available
from the corresponding author upon reasonable request.
1P. Lindner and T. Zemb, Neutron, X-rays and Light. Scattering Methods
Applied to Soft Condensed Matter (North-Holland, Amsterdam, 2002).
2J. Pedersen, in Neutron, X-Ray and Light: Scattering Methods Applied to
Soft Condensed Matter (edited by Th. Zemb and P. Lindner, North-Holland,
Amsterdam, 2002) pp. 391–420.
3M.-C. Chang, C.-H. Tung, S.-Y. Chang, J.-M. Carrillo, Y. Wang, B. G.
Sumpter, G.-R. Huang, C. Do, and W.-R. Chen, Commun. Phys. 5, 1–8
(2022).
4C.-H. Tung, S.-Y. Chang, H.-L. Chen, Y. Wang, K. Hong, J.-M. Carrillo,
B. G. Sumpter, Y. Shinohara, C. Do, and W.-R. Chen, J. Chem. Phys. 156,
131101 (2022).
5L. Ding, C.-H. Tung, B. G. Sumpter, W.-R. Chen, and C. Do, arXiv preprint
arXiv:2410.05574 (2024).
6L. Ding, C.-H. Tung, Z. Cao, Z. Ye, X. Gu, Y. Xia, W.-R. Chen, and C. Do,
arXiv preprint arXiv:2411.00134 (2024).
7L. Ding, Y. Chen, and C. Do, arXiv preprint arXiv:2412.07926 (2024).
8C.-H. Tung, S.-Y. Chang, M.-C. Chang, J.-M. Carrillo, B. G. Sumpter,
C. Do, and W.-R. Chen, Carbon Trends 10, 100252 (2023).
9C.-H. Tung, M.-Z. Chen, H.-L. Chen, G.-R. Huang, L. Porcar, M.-C.
Chang, J.-M. Carrillo, Y. Wang, B. G. Sumpter, Y. Shinohara, C. Do, and
W.-R. Chen, J. Appl. Cryst. 57, 1047 (2024).
10C.-H. Tung, Y.-J. Hsiao, H.-L. Chen, G.-R. Huang, L. Porcar, M.-C. Chang,
J.-M. Carrillo, Y. Wang, B. G. Sumpter, Y. Shinohara, J. Taylor, C. Do, and
W.-R. Chen, J. Colloid Interface Sci. 659, 739 (2024).
11Z. Liu, Y. Wang, S. Vaidya, F. Ruehle, J. Halverson, M. Soljaˇci´c, T. Y. Hou,
and M. Tegmark, arXiv:2404.19756 (2024).
12V. I. Arnol’d, Dokl. Akad. Nauk SSSR 108, 179 (1956).
13A. N. Kolmogorov, Dokl. Akad. Nauk SSSR 114, 679 (1957).
14R. H. Bartels, J. C. Beatty, and B. A. Barsky, An Introduction to Splines for
Use in Computer Graphics and Geometric Modeling (Morgan Kaufmann
Publishers, 1987).
15A. Odena, V. Dumoulin, and C. Olah, Distill 1, e3 (2016).
16F. Nallet, R. Laversanne,
and D. Roux, J. Phys. II France 3, 487–502
(1993).
17R. Zhang, R. M. Suter, and J. F. Nagle, Phys. Rev. E 50, 5047–5060 (1994).
18J. Lemmich, K. Mortensen, J. H. Ipsen, T. Hønger, R. Bauer, and O. G.
Mouritsen, Phys. Rev. E 53, 5169–5180 (1996).
19G. Pabst, M. Rappolt, H. Amenitsch, and P. Laggner, Phys. Rev. E 62,
4000–4009 (2000).
20G. Bouglet and C. Ligoure, Eur. Phys. J. B 9, 137–147 (1999).
21M. Mihailescu, M. Monkenbusch, J. Allgaier, H. Frielinghaus, D. Richter,
B. Jakobs, and T. Sottmann, Phys. Rev. E 66, 041504 (2002).
22F. Castro-Roman, L. Porcar, G. Porte, and C. Ligoure, Eur. Phys. J. E 18,
259–272 (2005).
23G. Pabst, R. Koschuch, B. Pozo-Navas, M. Rappolt, K. Lohner, and P. Lag-
gner, J. Appl. Crystallogr. 36, 1378–1388 (2004).
24P. T. Callaghan and O. Soderman, J. Phys. Chem. 77, 1737–1744 (1983).
25J. H. Davis, Biochim. Biophys. Acta 737, 117–171 (1983).
26G. Chidichimo, C. La Mesa, G. A. Ranieri, and M. Terenzi, Mol. Cryst.
Liq. Cryst. 150b, 221–236 (1987).
27G. Chidichimo, L. Coppola, C. La Mesa, G. A. Ranieri, and A. Saupe,
Chem. Phys. Lett. 145, 85–89 (1988).
28P. Ukleja, G. Chidichimo, and P. Photinos, Liq. Cryst. 9, 359 (1991).
29L. Coppola, R. Muzzalupo, G. A. Ranieri, and M. Terenzi, Langmuir 11,
1116–1121 (1995).
30H. Jóhannesson, I. Furó, and B. Halle, Phys. Rev. E 53, 4904 (1996).
31L. Coppola, R. Gianferri, I. Nicotera, and C. Oliviero, Mol. Cryst. Liq.
Cryst. 398, 157–167 (2003).
32P. L. Hubbard, K. M. McGrath,
and P. T. Callaghan, Langmuir 21,
4340–4346 (2005).
33S. Eriksson, S. Lasiˇc, M. Nilsson, C.-F. Westin, and D. Topgaard, J. Chem.
Phys. 142, 104201 (2015).
34M. Kléman, C. E. Williams, M. J. Costello, and T. Gulik-krzywicki, Philos.
Mag. 35, 33 (1977).
35R. B. Meyer, B. Stebler, and S. T. Lagerwall, Phys. Rev. Lett. 41, 1393
(1978).
36L. Bourdon, J. Sommeria, and M. Kléman, J. Physique 43, 77 (1982).
37M. J. Costello, S. Meiboom,
and M. Sammon, Phys. Rev. A 29, 2957
(1984).
38M. Allain and M. Kléman, J. Physique 45, 225 (1985).
39M. Allain, Europhys. Lett. 2, 597 (1986).
40M. Allain and M. Kléman, J. Physique 48, 1799 (1987).
41M. Kléman, Rep. Prog. Phys. 52, 555 (1989).
42R. Strey, W. Jahn, G. Porte, and P. Bassereau, Langmuir 6, 1635 (1990).
43C. Blanc, C. Meyer, S. S. Asnacios, M. Kléman, I. Lelidis, and J.-L. Martin,
Philos. Mag. Lett. 85, 641 (2005).
44P. Moreau, L. Navailles, J. Giermanska-Kahn, O. Mondain-Monval, F. Nal-
let, and D. Roux, Europhys. Lett. 73, 49 (2006).
45C. Zhang, M. Gao, N. Diorio, W. Weissflog, U. Baumeister, S. Sprunt, J. T.
Gleeson, and A. Jákli, Phys. Rev. Lett. 109, 107802 (2012).
46P. J. Photinos, L. J. Yu, and A. Saupe, Mol. Cryst. Liq. Cryst. 67, 277
(1981).
47N. Boden, S. A. Corne, and K. W. Jolley, Mol. Cryst. Liq. Cryst. 67, 277
(1981).
48P. J. Photinos and A. Saupe, J. Chem. Phys. 84, 517 (1986).
49P. Photinos and A. Saupe, Phys. Rev. A 43, 2890 (1991).
50N. Boden and K. W. Jolley, Phys. Rev. A 45, 8751 (1992).
51J. Rogers and P. A. Winsor, J. Colloid Interface Sci. 30, 247–257 (1969).
52G.-R. Huang, C.-H. Tung, M.-Z. Chen, L. Porcar, Y. Shinohara, C. U. Wild-
bruber, C. Do, and W.-R. Chen, J. Appl. Cryst. 56, 1537 (2023).
53S.-H. Chen and S.-M. Choi, J. Appl. Cryst. 30, 755 (1997).
54N. F. Berk, Phys. Rev. A 44, 5069 (1991).
55G. B. Arfken, H. J. Weber, and F. E. Harris, Mathematical Methods for
Physicists: A Comprehensive Guide (Academic Press, Cambridge, 2012).
56C. M. Bishop, Pattern Recognition and Machine Learning (Springer, 2006).
57P. Kékicheff, B. Cabane, and M. Rawiso, J. Physique Lett. 45, 813–821
(1984).
58E. J. W. Verway and J. T. G. Overbeek, Theory of The Stability of Lyophobic
Colloids (Elsevier Publ. Co. Inc., New York, 1948).
59J. N. Israelachvili, Intermolecular and Surface Forces (Academic Press,
Elsevier, 2011) pp. 139–140.
60R. L. Henderson, Phys. Lett. 49A, 197 (1974).
61C. G. Gray and K. E. Gubbins, Theory of Molecular Fluids: Fundamentals
Volume I (Clarendon Press, Oxford, 1984).
62P. A. Egelstaff, An Introduction to the Liquid State, 2nd Ed. (Clarendon
Press, Oxford, 1992).
63L. S. Ornstein and F. Zernike, Proc. Akad. Sci. 17, 793 (1914).
64J.-P. Hansen and I. R. McDonald, Theory of Simple Liquids with Applica-
tions to Soft Matter, 4th Ed. (Academic Press, Amsterdam, 2013).
65J. B. Hayter and J. Penfold, Mol. Phys. 42, 109 (1981).
66J.-P. Hansen and J. B. Hayter, Mol. Phys. 46, 651 (1982).
67I. K. Snook and J. B. Hayter, Langmuir 8, 2880 (1992).
68B. Beresford-Smith, D. Y. C. Chan, and D. J. Mitchell, J. Colloid Interface
Sci. 105, 216 (1985).
69R. Klein and B. D’Aguanno, Light Scattering: Principles and Development
(edited by W. Brown, Clarendon Press, Oxford, 1996) pp. 30–102.
70M. Heinen, P. Holmqvist, A. J. Banchio, and G. Nägele, J. Chem. Phys.
134, 044532 (2011).
71K. S. Schmitz, Macroions in Solution and Colloidal Suspension (Wiley-
VCH, New York, 1992).
72L. Belloni, Neutron, X-Ray and Light Scattering: Introduction to an Inves-
tigative Tool for Colloidal and Polymetric Systems (edited by Th. Zemb and
P. Lindner, North-Holland, Amsterdam, 1991) pp. 135–155.
73F. J. Rogers and D. A. Young, Phys. Rev. A 30, 999 (1984).
74M. Huš, M. Zalar, and T. Urbic, J. Chem. Phys. 138, 224508 (2013).
75J. A. Anta and S. Lago, J. Chem. Phys. 116, 10514 (2002).

10
76L. L. Lee, J. Chem. Phys. 107, 7360 (1997).
77M. S. Wertheim, Phys. Rev. Lett. 10, 321 (1963).
78M. Gillan, J. Phys. C: Solid State Phys. 7, L1 (1974).
