Self-Driving Laboratory Optimizes the Lower Critical Solution
Temperature of Thermoresponsive Polymers
Guoyue Xu
Renzheng Zhang
Tengfei Luo*
Department of Aerospace and Mechanical Engineering, University of Notre Dame, IN 46556, USA
To overcome the inherent inefficiencies of traditional
trial-and-error materials discovery, the scientific commu-
nity is increasingly developing autonomous laboratories
that integrate data-driven decision-making into closed-
loop experimental workflows. In this work, we realize this
concept for thermoresponsive polymers by developing
a low-cost, "frugal twin" platform for the optimization
of the lower critical solution temperature (LCST) of
poly(N-isopropylacrylamide)
(PNIPAM).
Our
system
integrates robotic fluid-handling, on-line sensors, and
Bayesian optimization (BO) that navigates the multi-
component salt solution spaces to achieve user-specified
LCST targets.
The platform demonstrates conver-
gence to target properties within a minimal number
of experiments.
It strategically explores the parameter
space, learns from informative "off-target" results, and
self-corrects to achieve the final targets. By providing an
accessible and adaptable blueprint, this work lowers the
barrier to entry for autonomous experimentation and ac-
celerates the design and discovery of functional polymers.
Introduction
Integrating artificial intelligence with laboratory automa-
tion has given rise to the self-driving laboratory (SDL) con-
cept, a term first discussed by Isenhour in 19851. An SDL
is a closed-loop system that enhances the scientific method
by integrating automated hardware for executing experi-
ments with intelligent software for data analysis and plan-
ning subsequent steps. This paradigm can accelerate sci-
entific discovery, with demonstrated potential to reduce re-
search timelines by factors of 10 to 10002–4, while also
cutting costs, waste, and energy consumption by 10 to
100 times5. In addition to efficiency, SDLs enhance opera-
tional consistency, ensuring experimental repeatability and
reducing human-induced variability6.
Foundational stud-
ies, such as King et al.’s Robot Scientist "Adam"7, Granda et
al.’s organic synthesis robot8, Burger et al.’s mobile robotic
chemist9, and MacLeod et al.’s thin-film materials labo-
ratory "Ada"10, have showcased SDL’s capabilities in au-
tonomously driving discoveries in chemistry and materials
science. Recent comprehensive reviews highlight advance-
ments, challenges, and efforts in SDL technologies across
various applications, including battery research11, addi-
*Corresponding author: tluo@nd.edu
tive manufacturing12, nanoparticle synthesis13,14, thin-film
electronics10, and chemical reaction discovery8,9. Looking
ahead, the community is focused on addressing the key chal-
lenges inherent in establishing these complex systems15,
with a growing emphasis on creating robust digital infras-
tructures and community standards to democratize access
to SDL technology6,16,17
Over the past five years, a rich open-source software
ecosystem has emerged to democratize SDL operation and
data handling.
Frameworks such as PyOpticon18 and
IvoryOS19 auto-generate graphical user interfaces around
Python device classes, while AlabOS20, HELAO-async21,
and ChemOS 2.022,23 provide scalable workflow manage-
ment. These open-source tools empower researchers to con-
struct and control automated workflows more easily, lower-
ing the entry barrier to autonomous science.
Yet, the path to SDLs still faces challenges in hardware
adaptability. Recent demonstrations show both the promise
and the price of full hardware integration.
At the high
end, Hitosugi et al.
built a dual-arm, dual-hexagon vac-
uum cluster that deposits, transfers, and characterizes Nb-
doped TiO2 films in a closed Bayesian optimization (BO)
loop, yielding ≈12 samples per day at ≈2h per cycle24, but
such chambers require a level of capital investment and in-
frastructure that is typically inaccessible to individual aca-
demic research groups.
At the opposite end, the open-
hardware community embraces low-cost, modular "frugal
twins"—physical surrogates of high-end SDLs that capture
core functionality at a fraction of the cost25.
For exam-
ple, the high cost of commercial high-throughput combi-
natorial printing systems, often exceeding $100,000, puts
them out of reach for most research groups. In contrast,
the open-hardware "frugal-twin" offers a more accessible al-
ternative. For example, the Archerfish system demonstrates
this principle by retrofitting a consumer 3-D printer for ap-
proximately $50026. Despite this 100-fold reduction in cost,
the platform achieves a remarkable throughput of up to
250 unique material compositions per minute. Such dra-
matic cost compression is key to democratizing access to au-
tonomous, data-rich experimentation and accelerating ma-
terials innovation.
In this work, we develop a "frugal-twin" autonomous plat-
form for soft-material discovery that closes the loop for
the data-driven exploration of functional polymers.
As a
testbed for our autonomous platform, we chose poly(N-
1
arXiv:2509.05351v1  [cond-mat.soft]  2 Sep 2025

Figure 1 Schematic of the Closed-Loop Autonomous Experimental Workflow. (A) The view of the complete system, showing the parallel
array of five modules and the integrated fluid-handling capability. (B) BO model update and recommend the most promising conditions
for the subsequent experiment (C) Through the graphical user interface (GUI), a user specifies the volume of each stock solution to be
dispensed, allowing for the precise formulation of each sample’s final composition (D) A detailed view of a single module highlights the key
components: a multi-port sample holder, photodiode detector, a Peltier element for rapid heating and cooling, and a heat sink for thermal
stability. This assembly enables automated, in-situ measurement of LCST by controlling both sample composition and temperature.
isopropylacrylamide) (PNIPAM), the most widely studied
thermoresponsive polymer27.
In water, PNIPAM exhibits
a sharp and reversible phase transition at its lower criti-
cal solution temperature (LCST), typically around 32 °C.
Below this temperature, the polymer chains exist as solu-
ble, extended coils. Above it, they collapse into compact,
hydrophobic globules. The proximity of this transition to
physiological temperatures makes PNIPAM a candidate ma-
terial for developing "smart" technologies, including con-
trolled drug delivery systems28,29, tissue engineering scaf-
folds30,31, and biosensors32,33.
A critical feature of PNIPAM is that its LCST is tunable
rather than fixed. It can be tuned by varying the concentra-
tion and type of dissolved salts34. This phenomenon is gov-
erned by the Hofmeister series, where different ions mod-
ulate the phase transition by altering the structure of the
water surrounding the polymer chains35. Salts can induce
a "salting-out" effect, disrupting the polymer’s hydration
shell and promoting hydrophobic interactions, which typi-
cally lowers the LCST. Mechanistically, anions tend to ex-
ert a more pronounced influence on the LCST than cations,
in line with their established Hofmeister rankings36, which
orders ions by their "salting-out" strength; for instance,
strongly salting-out ions like sulfate cause a much greater
LCST depression than weakly interacting ions like chloride.
The behavior in multi-component solutions containing
mixtures of two or three salts is more complex.
These
mixtures can exhibit synergistic effects that are difficult to
predict, as the cations and anions compete to stabilize or
destabilize the polymer’s hydration shell. This complexity
presents both a challenge and an opportunity: using salt
mixtures offers more degrees of freedom for fine-tuning the
LCST, but the vast, non-linear design space makes optimiza-
tion more difficult.
In our "frugal-twin" autonomous platform, we demon-
strate its capability by deploying BO to navigate the multi-
component salt solution space of PNIPAM and precisely con-
trol its LCST by tunning the types and concentrations of the
salts. The results indicate that our integrated robotic and
machine learning system can achieve desired material prop-
erties with high efficiency and minimal human intervention,
moving toward the accelerated and autonomous discovery
of functional polymers with cost-effective systems.
2

Experimental
Hardware
The automated platform consists of five identical modules,
integrated with a centralized fluid-handling system for au-
tomated sample preparation and analysis, as shown in Fig-
ure 1a.
This modular architecture enables simultaneous,
independent experiments. Each module works as an inde-
pendent reactor and is designed to allow the automated,
in-situ measurement of LCST. To determine the LCST, each
module has an optical detection system consisting of a 600
nm LED and a photodiode detector (FDS100) positioned
across the sample vial. During a measurement cycle, the
temperature is ramped from a starting point below the ex-
pected LCST to a final point above it. The detector records
the light intensity passing through the sample at each tem-
perature step. The LCST is then defined as the tempera-
ture at which the normalized transmittance reaches 50%
of its initial value, determined by linear interpolation be-
tween the two data points that span this threshold. A de-
tailed view is shown in Figure 1D, highlighting the key
components: a multi-port sample holder, photodiode detec-
tor, a Peltier TEC-12706AJ thermoelectric module for heat-
ing and cooling, and a heat sink to ensure thermal stabil-
ity. The system’s Arduino Mega 2560 microcontroller imple-
ments a Proportional-integral-derivative (PID) algorithm to
precisely regulate the sample temperature, using feedback
from a non-contact infrared sensor to modulate power to
the thermoelectric module. The fluid-handling subsystem
is responsible for creating samples with specific chemical
compositions.
This is achieved using a set of DC motor-
driven peristaltic pumps, managed by DRV8825 stepper mo-
tor drivers, for accurate liquid dispensing from source con-
tainers. Solenoid valves, actuated via a switching circuit us-
ing TN0106N3 MOSFETs, control the direction of fluid flow
to the designated sample vials. The Arduino serves as the
central controller for the entire platform, synchronizing the
operation of the pumps, valves, and thermoelectric mod-
ules, and providing integrated control over both liquid pro-
portioning and temperature control based on user-defined
parameters.
Software
The automated liquid distribution system is controlled by a
Python application with a graphical user interface (GUI) de-
veloped with the PyQt6 framework, which allows users to
monitor and manage different components and processes in
the system directly. Through the GUI, users can manage liq-
uid dispensing, actuate valves for fluid distribution, and set
and monitor temperature parameters for each sample. The
software includes a data analysis module that allows users
to select experimental data folders, visualize temperature
profiles, and calculate the LCST.
The program combines custom scripts and modules,
leveraging the Python Standard Library alongside several
third-party open-source libraries.
Core functionalities in-
clude hardware interfacing via pyfirmata for Arduino com-
munication. The software architecture comprises separate
functionalities, including motor control, temperature regu-
lation, valve operation, and data visualization. This modu-
lar design makes it easier to organize and expand the code-
base. The Python code for system control and data analysis
is available on GitHub.
Chemicals and materials
The precursor monomers and initiator solutions were
first prepared to synthesize PNIPAM hydrogels.
N-
isopropylacrylamide (NIPAM,97%, Sigma-Aldrich) was dis-
solved in deionized water (18.2 MΩ·cm) at 0.806 g per
10 ml. The crosslinker, N,N’-methylenebisacrylamide (BIS,
97%, purchased from Fisher Scientific), was prepared as a
solution of 0.2196 g in 10 mL of deionized water. The initia-
tor, potassium persulfate (KPS, 99. 0%, Sigma-Aldrich), was
dissolved in deionized water at 0.135 g per 10 ml concen-
tration.
N,N,N’,N’-Tetramethylethylenediamine (TEMED,
>98.0% (GC), TCI America, purchased from Fisher Scien-
tific) was used as an accelerator and added directly as re-
ceived. For a typical hydrogel synthesis, the following vol-
umes of the prepared stock solutions and reagents were
combined: 643 µL of the NIPAM solution, 85 µL of the BIS
solution, 121 µL of the KPS solution, and 8.9 µL of TEMED.
500 µL of deionized water was added to reach the final vol-
ume. After polymerization, a gentle thermal treatment was
used to separate the hydrogel from the surrounding liquid,
which was then removed.
Results and discussion
Validation of Fluid Handling,
Temperature
Control, and Measurement Repeatability
To establish a reliable and reproducible experimental plat-
form, the system’s performance was characterized in three
key areas: liquid handling precision, temperature control
stability, and LCST measurement repeatability.
First, the
precision of the fluid handling system was confirmed over
a broad range (20–1000 µL). As shown in Figure 2A, the
measured values closely matched the commanded setpoints,
yielding high linearity, R2 = 0.998, and demonstrating ac-
curate fluid delivery. The platform’s temperature stability
was assessed across a range of setpoints relevant to PNIPAM
LCST transitions. For each setpoint, the temperature was
measured using an IR sensor every 3 seconds for 8 min-
utes.
Figure 2B shows the platform’s thermal conditions
and achieves accurate temperature control throughout the
entire experimental range, with an average standard devi-
ation across all setpoints of 0.30°C, demonstrating robust
and precise thermal regulation essential for reproducible
LCST measurements.
Finally, the overall LCST measure-
ment repeatability was evaluated by performing standard
PNIPAM LCST determination at five independent sample
modules. As illustrated in Figure 2C, the measured LCSTs
across stations exhibited good consistency, with an average
value of 30.59°C and a standard deviation of 0.15°C. Collec-
tively, these results show that the automated platform deliv-
3

Figure 2 System validation and performance testing. (A) Liquid handling accuracy and precision, showing measured versus commanded
volumes for automated dispensing. (B) Temperature control stability, showing measured temperatures versus set temperatures across the
experimental range. Measurements were recorded every 3 seconds for 8 minutes at each setpoint, with an average standard deviation of
0.30°C, confirming robust and precise temperature control. (C) Repeatability of standard PNIPAM LCST measurements performed at
five independent sample modules, with an average LCST of 30.59°C and a standard deviation of 0.15°C. These results demonstrate the
automated platform’s accuracy, temperature stability, and measurement reproducibility.
ers reproducible results, establishing a reliable foundation
for subsequent autonomous experimentation and machine
learning-guided optimization.
Autonomous experimentation with machine
learning model
To optimize the LCST of PNIPAM in two- and three-salt so-
lutions, we implemented a machine learning-driven exper-
imental loop guided by BO37. This data-driven approach
has proven highly effective and data-efficient across a range
of materials discovery challenges, such as for thermoelec-
tric materials38,39, additive manufacturing40, and jet sinter-
ing41.
For our surrogate model, we chose Gaussian Process Re-
gression (GPR) due to its ability to provide not only pre-
dictions but also the quantification of uncertainty. The GP
defines a probability distribution over functions, and our
model assumes the LCST(f(x))) can be represented as:
f(x) ∼G P(m(x),k(x,x′))
(1)
where m(x) is the mean function (assumed to be zero) and
k(x,x′) is the covariance function, or kernel, which models
the relationship between different points in the parameter
space.
The experimental framework comprises two models that
operate on input vectors,
x,
representing either two-
dimensional (x = [CNaCl,CNaBr]) or three-dimensional salt
concentrations (x = [CNaCl,CNaBr,CCaCl2]). The LCST output,
y, for each composition is the mean of three replicate exper-
iments. To improve numerical stability, each feature and the
response are standardized to zero mean and unit variance:
˜x = x−µ x
σ x
,
˜y = y−µy
σy
,
(2)
where µx and σx are the mean vector and standard devia-
tion vector.
k2-salt(˜x, ˜x′) =σ2
f Maternν=1
 ∥˜x −˜x′∥; ℓ

|
{z
}
σ2
f =12.25
ℓ=[12.3,15.3]
+
σ2
n δ˜x,˜x′
| {z }
σ2n =6.7×10−12
(3)
For the two-salt surrogate model (NaCl, NaBr), we adopted
a composite kernel combining Matern and White Noise ker-
nel. The model’s hyperparameters were optimized by maxi-
mizing the log-marginal likelihood, and the final values re-
veal key features of the system’s behavior. The fitted sig-
nal variance is σ2
f = 12.25, which sets the overall amplitude
of LCST fluctuations captured by the smooth Matern com-
ponent. The anisotropic length-scales are ℓNaCl = 12.3 and
ℓNaBr = 15.3 (in standardized units), which suggests that the
LCST is more sensitive to changes in NaCl concentration
compared to the more gradual influence of NaBr. A smooth-
ness parameter of ν = 1 was chosen for the Matern kernel to
balance model complexity with the limited dataset. The per-
formance of the GPR model was evaluated using leave-one-
out cross-validation. The resulting parity plot, presented in
Supplementary Information (SI) Figure S1, shows a strong
correlation between the predicted and experimental values.
The model exhibits high predictive accuracy, achieving a co-
efficient of determination (R2) of 0.941.
For the higher-dimensional three–salt space (NaCl, NaBr,
CaCl2), a more complicate composite kernel was required to
4

Figure 3 Machine Learning-guided optimization of LCST in two-salt compositions. (A) The result from the second round of BO (star)
yields an LCST of 25.76±0.12°C, closely approaching the target. (B, D) After this measurement, the GPR model is updated, generating
a new LCST prediction map (B) and the corresponding EI landscape (D) to guide the third round. The EI map directs the platform to
select the next candidate (cross) from the region of highest predicted value. (C) The third round experiment at this new BO-recommended
location achieves the target with a measured LCST of 26.08±0.24°C.
accurately model the LCST response.
k3-salt(˜x, ˜x′) =σ2
lin (˜x⊤˜x′)
|
{z
}
≈1.35
+σ2
RBF exp
 
−1
2
3
∑
d=1
(˜xd −˜x′
d)2
ℓ2
RBF,d
!
|
{z
}
σ2
RBF≈0.107
ℓRBF=[0.334,1.87,0.535]
+σ2
Mat Maternν=2.5
 ∥˜x −˜x′∥; ℓMat

|
{z
}
σ2
Mat≈0.061
ℓMat=[0.0139,100,100]
+ σ2
n δ˜x,˜x′
| {z }
σ2n =10−10
(4)
This complex kernel provides a robust model by simulta-
neously capturing a dominant linear trend via a Dot Product
component and modeling complex, non-linear interactions
with RBF and Matern terms.
These trained surrogate models are integrated into a BO
framework, utilizing an expected improvement (EI) acquisi-
tion function. As the objective is to identify a specific target
LCST rather than a global optimum, the standard EI func-
tion is adapted. For this target-seeking problem, ’improve-
ment’, I(x), is mathematically defined as the negative abso-
lute difference between the model’s predicted LCST and the
specified target value.
I(x) = −|ypred(x)−ytarget|
(5)
This formulation directs the optimization process toward re-
gions of the parameter space predicted to be closer to the
target.
EI(x) = I(x)Φ(z)+σ(x)φ(z)
(6)
where:
z = −|ypred(x)−ytarget|
σ(x)
(7)
and Φ(·) and φ(·) are the standard normal CDF and PDF, re-
spectively. EI not only accounts for the predicted improve-
ment but also considers the uncertainty of the prediction,
encouraging the exploration of less certain areas that still
have potential. To determine the optimal experimental con-
ditions, we evaluate EI across a dense grid of candidate con-
centrations and select the condition that maximizes EI for
subsequent experimental validation. After each optimiza-
tion round, the corresponding GPR model is retrained using
the expanded dataset, and subsequent experimental condi-
tions are selected based on maximum EI values. By iter-
atively updating the GP model and recalculating EI after
each new experiment, our autonomous platform effectively
navigates the chemical parameter space toward rapid con-
vergence to desired LCST values with minimal experimental
overhead.
We first deployed our autonomous platform on the two-
salt system (NaCl–NaBr) to perform a targeted optimization
for an LCST of 26°C. Before initiating the closed-loop pro-
cess detailed in Figure 3, the GPR model was initialized
with a 13-point experimental dataset to provide broad cov-
erage of the two-salt parameter space. This initial set was
selected using a structured approach, sampling points along
5

Figure 4 Machine learning-guided optimization of LCST in three-salt compositions. (A) Optimization trajectories for targeting 25°C
(blue) and 27°C (red). (B, C, E, F) Representative EI heat maps visualizing the model’s decision-making process. The algorithm identifies
optimal candidates (yellow markers) by targeting regions predicted to offer the greatest improvement over the current best observation.
Red circles denote previously measured experimental data points. (D) Tabulated salt concentrations (NaCl, NaBr, CaCl2) and resulting
LCSTs for each experimental round.
each axis and an interior point to capture a combined effect.
Initially, the model-guided experiments yielded an average
LCST of 24.55 ± 0.32°C, below the intended target (Figure
S2). Figure 3A shows normalized transmittance data from
the BO-recommended salt condition (NaCl: 0.452 mol/L,
NaBr: 0.796 mol/L), resulting in LCST measurement of
25.76 ± 0.12°C, approaching the target. The updated GPR
model provided a new prediction of the LCST landscape
(Figure 3B). Based on this updated model, the EI acquisition
function is used to identify the optimal candidate for the
next round of experiments. Figure 3C illustrates the subse-
quent experimental validation at the next BO-selected con-
centration (NaCl: 0.748 mol/L, NaBr: 0.38 mol/L), achiev-
ing an LCST of 26.08 ± 0.24°C, within the acceptable mar-
gin of the target. Figure 3D visualizes the corresponding
EI landscape for the 26°C LCST target, clearly highlighting
high-potential regions (bright yellow) used by the algorithm
to efficiently steer experimentation toward optimal condi-
tions. Together, these iterative results demonstrate how the
autonomous experimental platform effectively leverages BO
to guide experiments, achieving rapid convergence to the
targeted LCST with minimal experimental effort. To confirm
the general applicability and robustness of our system, ad-
ditional validation experiments targeting LCSTs of 27°C and
30°C were conducted, successfully identifying appropriate
salt compositions. Detailed results of these validations are
provided in Figure S3.
To demonstrate the efficacy of our closed-loop optimiza-
tion framework in a more complex parameter space, we
used the three-salt GPR model (NaCl, NaBr, and CaCl2), ini-
tialized with seven diverse data points, which was strategi-
cally selected to provide a robust starting point for the opti-
mization. This initial design of experiments included points
along each axis to capture the effect of each individual salt,
as well as interior points representing both two- and three-
salt mixtures. This structured approach, chosen over ran-
dom sampling, ensures the initial model is informed by a
diverse set of conditions. The platform was used to perform
a series of experiments aimed at identifying salt concentra-
tions that met two distinct LCST targets, as illustrated in
Figure 4. Task 1, targeting an LCST of 25°C, demonstrated
the platform’s power for rapid, iterative refinement. The
first BO-guided experiment (round 1) yielded an LCST of
24.17 ± 0.33°C (Fig. 4D). While not at the target, this first
step provided the model with information about the local
parameter landscape.
As illustrated in the SI, Figure S4,
this new information significantly refined the GPR model,
correcting its initially simplified prediction of the 25°C con-
tour. With this updated understanding of the system, the
platform’s EI acquisition function was then able to propose
a more refined composition for the next iteration. This sec-
ond BO-guided experiment (round 2) successfully achieved
an LCST of 24.93±0.14°C , which within the error margin of
the target. This process demonstrated the platform’s capac-
ity to learn from each experiment and direct it towards the
desired goal (Fig. 4A, blue trace).
Task 2, targeting a 27°C LCST, highlighted the platform’s
ability of exploration for complex problems. The initial ex-
periment (round 1) yielded an LCST of 28.06 ± 0.21°C. The
BO-guided experiment conducted in round 2 yielded a tem-
perature of 25.92±0.16°C. While neither experiment hit the
target, these results provided valuable data from a differ-
6

Figure 5 Five-round verification experiment targeting on 25°C LCST (A) The optimization trajectory for a five-round verification campaign
(rounds 3-7). After two successful initial hits (purple square), the system makes two exploratory off-target measurements (orange diamond)
and then successfully self-corrects to achieve a precise final hit on the 25°C target in round 7 (yellow star). (B, C) EI maps generated for
round 7, with the star highlighting the selected EI candidate. (E, F) The corresponding prediction uncertainty maps illustrate how the
model’s confidence changes throughout the experiment. The yellow diamond marks the round 5 candidate, which was specifically chosen
on regions of high uncertainty. (D) Tabulated salt compositions and resulting LCSTs for each verification round.
ent region of the parameter space. After incorporating the
learnings from the previous two rounds, the GPR model gen-
erated the updated Expected Improvement landscape for
the third round, as shown in Figures 4E and 4F. Guided by
this heat map, the platform selected its candidate for round
3, which achieved an LCST of 26.83 ± 0.18°C. This brought
the measurement to within 0.2°C of the target. The comple-
tion of these two tasks shows the robustness and efficiency
of the autonomous platform.
To further test the platform’s capabilities, we conducted a
five-round verification experiments targeting at 25°C LCST.
Those experiments (rounds 3-7) were designed to show the
system’s ability to self-correct and navigate a complex local
landscape, as illustrated in Figure 5. The two successful ex-
periments in round 3 and round 4 (Fig. 5A, purple squares),
which confirmed the existence of a viable compositional re-
gion near the 25°C target.
Following this initial success,
the platform strategically shifted from exploitation to explo-
ration. The prediction uncertainty maps revealed regions
where the model’s confidence was low, and guided by this,
the algorithm intentionally selected a candidate in a high
uncertainty area for round 5 (orange diamond, Fig. 5E, F).
This exploratory approach, along with an additional inves-
tigation in round 6, resulted in LCST values of 24.23 ± 0.35
°C and 23.73±0.39 °C, both were off the target.
From those failures, the exploratory data points were cru-
cial for building a more accurate GPR model for the un-
certain regimes in the parameter space. After incorporat-
ing the points of both successful experiments and informa-
tive misses, the platform recommends the final EI landscape
shown for round 7 (Fig. 5B, C). With a much richer under-
standing of the system, the algorithm made its final selec-
tion (yellow star). This last experiment achieved an LCST
of 25.04±0.19°C, which demonstrates the system’s ability to
self-correct after exploratory steps and converge on the tar-
get. These experiments demonstrate the platform’s ability
to navigate the exploration-exploitation trade-off, which is
critical for efficiently mapping a complex parameter space
and rapidly converging on desired experimental results.
Conclusions
In this work, we have successfully designed, built, and
demonstrated an autonomous closed-loop platform for the
accelerated optimization of poly(N-isopropylacrylamide)’s
LCST. We demonstrated that by integrating robotic fluid
handling with a BO framework utilizing a GPR surrogate
model, our system can efficiently navigate complex, multi-
component chemical spaces.
The comprehensive validation of the platform’s hardware
confirmed its high precision in liquid handling, stability in
temperature control, and reproducibility, establishing a re-
liable framework for data-driven discovery.
The machine
learning-guided workflow was shown to be effective for op-
timizing the LCST of PNIPAM in complex, multi-component
salt solutions. In the experiments, the system converged on
specified LCST targets in both two- and three-salt systems,
showcasing its adaptability to problems of varying complex-
ity.
7

We also demonstrated the platform’s ability to self-
correct.
The multi-round verification experiments high-
lighted how the system strategically balances exploitation
of known information with the exploration of uncertain re-
gions. By intelligently learning from both on-target experi-
ments and informative off-target experiments, the platform
successfully recovered from deviations to achieve a final,
high-precision objective. This capacity to leverage all ex-
perimental outcomes for model improvement is fundamen-
tal to the SDL’s stability, enabling it to converge on targets
even after exploring non-optimal conditions.
Conflicts of interest
There are no conflicts to declare.
Data availability
All experimental code supporting the findings of this study
is openly available in the associated GitHub repository:
https://github.com/An-xu/SDL_LCST_OP. The repository
contains the source code for automated control and data
analysis.
Notes and references
[1] Thomas L Isenhour. Robotics in the laboratory. Journal
of Chemical Information and Computer Sciences, 25(3):
292–295, 1985.
[2] Fernando Delgado-Licona and Milad Abolhasani. Re-
search acceleration in self-driving labs: Technological
roadmap toward accelerated materials and molecular
discovery. Advanced Intelligent Systems, 5(4):2200331,
2023.
[3] Amanda A Volk and Milad Abolhasani. Performance
metrics to unleash the power of self-driving labs in
chemistry and materials science. Nature Communica-
tions, 15(1):1378, 2024.
[4] Florian Häse,
Loïc M Roch,
and Alán Aspuru-
Guzik.
Next-generation experimentation with self-
driving laboratories. Trends in Chemistry, 1(3):282–
291, 2019.
[5] Tonghui Wang, Ruipeng Li, Hossein Ardekani, Lucía
Serrano-Luján, Jiantao Wang, Mahdi Ramezani, Ryan
Wilmington, Mihirsinh Chauhan, Robert W Epps,
Kasra Darabi, et al. Sustainable materials acceleration
platform reveals stable and efficient wide-bandgap
metal halide perovskite alloys.
Matter, 6(9):2963–
2986, 2023.
[6] Gary Tom, Stefan P Schmid, Sterling G Baird, Yang
Cao, Kourosh Darvish, Han Hao, Stanley Lo, Sergio
Pablo-García, Ella M Rajaonson, Marta Skreta, et al.
Self-driving laboratories for chemistry and materials
science. Chemical Reviews, 124(16):9633–9732, 2024.
[7] Ross D King, Jem Rowland, Wayne Aubrey, Maria
Liakata, Magdalena Markham, Larisa N Soldatova,
Ken E Whelan, Amanda Clare, Mike Young, Andrew
Sparkes, et al. The robot scientist adam. Computer, 42
(8):46–54, 2009.
[8] Jarosław M Granda, Liva Donina, Vincenza Dragone,
De-Liang Long, and Leroy Cronin. Controlling an or-
ganic synthesis robot with machine learning to search
for new reactivity. Nature, 559(7714):377–381, 2018.
[9] Benjamin Burger, Phillip M Maffettone, Vladimir V Gu-
sev, Catherine M Aitchison, Yang Bai, Xiaoyan Wang,
Xiaobo Li, Ben M Alston, Buyi Li, Rob Clowes, et al. A
mobile robotic chemist. Nature, 583(7815):237–241,
2020.
[10] Benjamin P MacLeod, Fraser GL Parlane, Thomas D
Morrissey, Florian Häse, Loïc M Roch, Kevan E Det-
telbach, Raphaell Moreira, Lars PE Yunker, Michael B
Rooney, Joseph R Deeth, et al. Self-driving laboratory
for accelerated discovery of thin-film materials. Sci-
ence Advances, 6(20):eaaz8867, 2020.
[11] Adarsh Dave, Jared Mitchell, Sven Burke, Hongyi Lin,
Jay Whitacre, and Venkatasubramanian Viswanathan.
Autonomous optimization of nonaqueous battery elec-
trolytes via robotic experimentation and machine
learning. arXiv preprint arXiv:2111.14786, 2021.
[12] Kelsey L Snapp, Aldair E Gongora, and Keith A Brown.
Increasing throughput in fused deposition modeling
by modulating bed temperature. Journal of Manufac-
turing Science and Engineering, 143(9):094502, 2021.
[13] Amanda A Volk, Robert W Epps, Daniel T Yonemoto,
Benjamin S Masters, Felix N Castellano, Kristofer G
Reyes, and Milad Abolhasani. Alphaflow: autonomous
discovery and optimization of multi-step chemistry us-
ing a self-driven fluidic lab guided by reinforcement
learning. Nature Communications, 14(1):1403, 2023.
[14] Milad Abolhasani and Eugenia Kumacheva. The rise
of self-driving labs in chemical and materials sciences.
Nature Synthesis, 2(6):483–492, 2023.
[15] Martin Seifrid, Robert Pollice, Andres Aguilar-Granda,
Zamyla Morgan Chan, Kazuhiro Hotta, Cher Tian
Ser, Jenya Vestfrid, Tony C Wu, and Alan Aspuru-
Guzik.
Autonomous chemical experiments:
Chal-
lenges and perspectives on establishing a self-driving
lab.
Accounts of Chemical Research, 55(17):2454–
2466, 2022.
[16] Oliver Bayley, Elia Savino, Aidan Slattery, and Timothy
Noël. Autonomous chemistry: Navigating self-driving
labs in chemical and material sciences. Matter, 7(7):
2382–2398, 2024.
[17] Sayan Doloi, Maloy Das, Matthew Osvaldo, Yujia Li,
Zen Han Cho, Xingchi Xiao, John V Hanna, and
8

Leonard Ng Wei Tat. Democratizing self-driving labs:
Advances in low-cost 3d printing for laboratory au-
tomation. Digital Discovery, 2025.
[18] Richard Randall and Arun Majumdar. Pyopticon: An
open-source python package for laboratory control,
automation, and visualization. Chemistry of Materials,
2025.
[19] Wenyu Zhang, Lucy Hao, Veronica Lai, Ryan Corkery,
Jacob Jessiman, Jiayu Zhang, Junliang Liu, Yusuke
Sato, Maria Politi, Matthew E Reish, et al. Ivoryos: an
interoperable web interface for orchestrating python-
based self-driving laboratories.
Nature Communica-
tions, 16(1):1–8, 2025.
[20] Yuxing Fei, Bernardus Rendy, Rishi Kumar, Olympia
Dartsi, Hrushikesh P Sahasrabuddhe, Matthew J Mc-
Dermott, Zheren Wang, Nathan J Szymanski, Lau-
ren N Walters, David Milsted, et al. Alabos: a python-
based reconfigurable workflow management frame-
work for autonomous laboratories. Digital Discovery,
3(11):2275–2288, 2024.
[21] Dan Guevarra, Kevin Kan, Yungchieh Lai, Ryan JR
Jones, Lan Zhou, Phillip Donnelly, Matthias Richter,
Helge S Stein, and John M Gregoire. Orchestrating
nimble experiments across interconnected labs. Digi-
tal Discovery, 2(6):1806–1812, 2023.
[22] Loïc M Roch, Florian Häse, Christoph Kreisbeck,
Teresa Tamayo-Mendoza, Lars PE Yunker, Jason E
Hein, and Alán Aspuru-Guzik.
Chemos: orchestrat-
ing autonomous experimentation. Science Robotics, 3
(19):eaat5559, 2018.
[23] Malcolm Sim, Mohammad Ghazi Vakili, Felix Strieth-
Kalthoff, Han Hao, Riley J Hickman, Santiago Miret,
Sergio Pablo-García, and Alán Aspuru-Guzik. Chemos
2.0: An orchestration architecture for chemical self-
driving laboratories. Matter, 7(9):2959–2977, 2024.
[24] Ryota Shimizu, Shigeru Kobayashi, Yuki Watanabe, Ya-
sunobu Ando, and Taro Hitosugi. Autonomous mate-
rials synthesis by machine learning and robotics. APL
Materials, 8(11), 2020.
[25] Stanley Lo, Sterling G Baird, Joshua Schrier, Ben
Blaiszik, Nessa Carson, Ian Foster, Andrés Aguilar-
Granda, Sergei V Kalinin, Benji Maruyama, Maria
Politi, et al.
Review of low-cost self-driving labora-
tories in chemistry and materials science: the “frugal
twin” concept. Digital Discovery, 3(5):842–868, 2024.
[26] Alexander E Siemenn, Basita Das, Eunice Aissi, Fang
Sheng, Lleyton Elliott, Blake Hudspeth, Marilyn Mey-
ers, James Serdy, and Tonio Buonassisi. Archerfish: a
retrofitted 3d printer for high-throughput combinato-
rial experimentation via continuous printing. Digital
Discovery, 2025.
[27] Avraham Halperin, Martin Kröger, and Françoise M
Winnik. Poly (n-isopropylacrylamide) phase diagrams:
fifty years of research.
Angewandte Chemie Interna-
tional Edition, 54(51):15342–15367, 2015.
[28] Haydn T Mitchell,
Spencer A Schultz,
Philip J
Costanzo,
and
Andres
W
Martinez.
Poly
(n-
isopropylacrylamide) hydrogels for storage and de-
livery of reagents to paper-based analytical devices.
Chromatography, 2(3):436–451, 2015.
[29] Zahra Ayar,
Mehdi Shafieian,
Narges Mahmoodi,
Omid Sabzevari, and Zahra Hassannejad. A recharge-
able drug delivery system based on pnipam hydrogel
for the local release of curcumin. Journal of Applied
Polymer Science, 138(40):51167, 2021.
[30] Sajjad Ashraf, Hun-Kuk Park, Hansoo Park, and Soo-
Hong Lee. Snapshot of phase transition in thermore-
sponsive hydrogel pnipam: Role in drug delivery and
tissue engineering. Macromolecular Research, 24:297–
304, 2016.
[31] Kun Wu, Yanan Hu, and Huiping Feng. Investigation
of 3d-printed pnipam-based constructs for tissue en-
gineering applications: a review. Journal of Materials
Science, 58(47):17727–17750, 2023.
[32] Anubhab Das, Anashwara Babu, Sourav Chakraborty,
Joachim FR Van Guyse, Richard Hoogenboom, and
Samarendra Maji. Poly (n-isopropylacrylamide) and
its copolymers: a review on recent advances in the
areas of sensing and biosensing. Advanced Functional
Materials, 34(37):2402432, 2024.
[33] Molla R Islam, Andrews Ahiabu, Xue Li, and Michael J
Serpe.
Poly (n-isopropylacrylamide) microgel-based
optical devices for sensing and biosensing.
Sensors,
14(5):8984–8995, 2014.
[34] Hongbo Du, Ranil Wickramasinghe, and Xianghong
Qian. Effects of salt on the lower critical solution tem-
perature of poly (n-isopropylacrylamide). The Journal
of Physical Chemistry B, 114(49):16594–16604, 2010.
[35] Christopher M Burba, Shawn M Carter, Kevin J
Meyer, and Charles V Rice.
Salt effects on poly (n-
isopropylacrylamide) phase transition thermodynam-
ics from nmr spectroscopy.
The Journal of Physical
Chemistry B, 112(34):10399–10404, 2008.
[36] Kevin J Pastoor and Charles V Rice. Cation effects on
the phase transition of n-isopropylacrylamide hydro-
gels. Macromolecular chemistry and physics, 216(9):
1024–1032, 2015.
[37] Ke Wang and Alexander W Dowling. Bayesian opti-
mization for chemical products and functional mate-
rials.
Current Opinion in Chemical Engineering, 36:
100728, 2022.
9

[38] Kaidong Song, Guoyue Xu, Ali Newaz Mohammad
Tanvir, Ke Wang, Md Omarsany Bappy, Haijian Yang,
Wenjie Shang, Le Zhou, Alexander W Dowling, Tengei
Luo, et al. Machine learning-assisted 3d printing of
thermoelectric materials of ultrahigh performances at
room temperature. Journal of Materials Chemistry A,
12(32):21243–21251, 2024.
[39] Mortaza Saeidi-Javash, Ke Wang, Minxiang Zeng,
Tengfei Luo, Alexander W Dowling, and Yanliang
Zhang. Machine learning-assisted ultrafast flash sin-
tering of high-performance and flexible silver–selenide
thermoelectric devices. Energy & Environmental Sci-
ence, 15(12):5093–5104, 2022.
[40] Ke Wang, Minxiang Zeng, Jialu Wang, Wenjie Shang,
Yanliang Zhang, Tengfei Luo, and Alexander W Dowl-
ing.
When physics-informed data analytics outper-
forms black-box machine learning: A case study in
thickness control for additive manufacturing. Digital
Chemical Engineering, 6:100076, 2023.
[41] Zhongyu Cheng, Ke Wang, Ali MN Tanvir, Wenjie
Shang, Tengfei Luo, Yanliang Zhang, Alexander W
Dowling, and David B Go. Bayesian optimization of
low-temperature nonthermal plasma jet sintering of
nanoinks. ACS Applied Materials & Interfaces, 16(35):
46897–46908, 2024.
10
