1 
 
Notice: This manuscript has been authored by UT-Battelle, LLC, under Contract No. DE-AC0500OR22725 
with the U.S. Department of Energy. The United States Government retains and the publisher, by accepting 
the article for publication, acknowledges that the United States Government retains a non-exclusive, paid-
up, irrevocable, world-wide license to publish or reproduce the published form of this manuscript, or allow 
others to do so, for the United States Government purposes. The Department of Energy will provide public 
access to these results of federally sponsored research in accordance with the DOE Public Access Plan 
(http://energy.gov/downloads/doe-public-access-plan). 
 
 

2 
 
 
Bayesian Active Learning for Scanning Probe Microscopy:  
from Gaussian Processes to Hypothesis Learning 
 
Maxim Ziatdinov,1,2,* Yongtao Liu,2 Kyle Kelley,2 Rama Vasudevan,2 and Sergei V. Kalinin3,* 
 
1 Computational Sciences and Engineering Division and 2 Center for Nanophase Materials Sciences, Oak 
Ridge National Laboratory, Oak Ridge, TN 37831, USA 
3 Department of Materials Sciences and Engineering, University of Tennessee, Knoxville, TN 37996, 
USA 
 
Abstract 
Recent progress in machine learning methods, and the emerging availability of programmable interfaces 
for scanning probe microscopes (SPMs), have propelled automated and autonomous microscopies to the 
forefront of attention of the scientific community. However, enabling automated microscopy requires the 
development of task-specific machine learning methods, understanding the interplay between physics 
discovery and machine learning, and fully defined discovery workflows. This, in turn, requires balancing 
the physical intuition and prior knowledge of the domain scientist with rewards that define experimental 
goals and machine learning algorithms that can translate these to specific experimental protocols. Here, we 
discuss the basic principles of Bayesian active learning and illustrate its applications for SPM. We progress 
from the Gaussian Process as a simple data-driven method and Bayesian inference for physical models as 
an extension of physics-based functional fits to more complex deep kernel learning methods, structured 
Gaussian Processes, and hypothesis learning. These frameworks allow for the use of prior data, the 
discovery of specific functionalities as encoded in spectral data, and exploration of physical laws 
manifesting during the experiment. The discussed framework can be universally applied to all techniques 
combining imaging and spectroscopy, SPM methods, nanoindentation, electron microscopy and 
spectroscopy, and chemical imaging methods, and can be particularly impactful for destructive or 
irreversible measurements.   
Keywords: Bayesian; active learning; Gaussian Process; scanning probe microscopy; automated 
experiments; automated and autonomous microscopies; deep kernel learning; hypothesis learning 
 
Corresponding emails: ziatdinovma@ornl.gov; sergei2@utk.edu    
 

3 
 
Scanning probe microscopy (SPM) has become a mainstay of multiple scientific fields including 
materials science, condensed matter physics, biology, and medicine.1-3 The relatively low cost and ease of 
use of ambient and environmental SPM systems made them ubiquitous across academic and industrial labs, 
with nanometer resolution images of the surface topographies,4 electric,5, 6 magnetic,7, 8 and mechanical9, 10 
properties becoming commonplace. Liquid SPMs provide deep insights into the electrochemical 
processes11, 12 or dynamics and mechanical properties of biological objects in vivo. Finally, the ultra-high 
vacuum SPMs, typically operated as a part of the surface science/deposition systems, allow exploring 
structures and electronic properties of surfaces on atomic level,13, 14 and are now becoming the key 
component of the development of enabling technologies and basic knowledge in quantum sciences.15  
 
Beyond structural and functional imaging, all SPM methods can modify the state of the surface. 
The trivial (and undesired) example of this is the surface damage during scanning, often associated with tip 
degradation. Under controlled conditions, the tip-surface interactions can be used for mechanical and 
electrochemical lithography,16, 17 altering surface morphology or inducing local electrochemical 
transformations. In ferroelectric materials, the bias applied to the probe can be used to change the 
polarization state of the surface, modifying and creating domain patterns.18, 19 Finally, the probe can be used 
to move individual atoms and molecules along the surface, inducing the chemical reactions and assembling 
structures from individual atoms.20, 21  
 
This broad variety of SPM methods was established in late 1990s, and progress since then has been 
primarily associated with the improvements in instrument design, the introduction of a broad range of 
environmental capabilities, and in several cases, with the increase of the volumes of the acquired data.22 
For the latter, examples include ‘hyperspectral’ imaging methods, where the spectroscopic data sets are 
acquired over the rectangular grid of points, giving rise to 3D data sets. The well-known examples of these 
methods are continuous imaging tunneling spectroscopy (CITS)23 in scanning tunneling microscopy and 
force-volume imaging24 in atomic force microscopy. A particularly broad range of spectroscopic methods 
have been developed in the context of Piezoresponse Force Microscopy (PFM),25 this development made 
possible by the intrinsically quantitative nature of PFM and the strong connection between the measured 
signal and the fundamental physics of the electric polarization order parameter.26, 27 
 
The acquisition of large data volumes has further required the development of methods for the 
analysis and interpretation of these data sets. In cases for which physical models are known, individual 
spectra can be converted to relevant physical descriptors. For example, force-distance curves can be 
analyzed using continuum mechanical models to yield the indentation modulus,28 whereas amplitude-
frequency curves in band excitation can be fitted to yield resonance frequency and response amplitude.29 
However, in most cases the models are not available or poorly known, necessitating the development of 

4 
 
machine learning methods for data reduction, with examples ranging from principal component analysis30 
to neural network recognition31 and manifold learning.32  
 
The rapid growth in deep learning methods in computer vision, robotics, and medical image 
analysis over the last decade has further resulted in applications of these methods within SPM imaging. 
Here, deep learning methods have been used for identification of atoms and defects on a Si surface,33 
recognition of DNA molecules,34 imaging biological objects, identifying ferroelectric domain walls,35 and 
conditioning the state of the probe36, 37.  
 
Finally, the availability of multiple information channels representing the structure and physical 
functionalities in SPM have further enabled structure-property data mining. Here, the relationships between 
the individual structural elements and functionalities determined via spectroscopic methods are discovered. 
Examples of such approaches include the relationship between ferroelectric domain structures and local 
hysteresis loops in PFM38, and local electronic properties and structure in graphene.39 
 
Most applications of machine learning methods in SPM have been realized for already acquired 
data, effectively exploring the internal correlations between spatial and spectroscopic dimensions of a static 
dataset that has been acquired over a rectangular grid of points. At the same time, many commercial 
instruments allow (or can be modified to allow) some degree of external control, moving the probe to 
predefined locations, initiating acquisition of spectroscopic data, and generating custom probe signals. 
While early reports on controlled experimental path have been available for decades,40-42 the recent 
introduction of programmable controllers made these approaches considerably more accessible. This have 
generated much enthusiasm on combining the machine-learning based data analysis within the microscope 
data acquisition loop, i.e., the concept of automated and autonomous microscopy. Correspondingly, a 
number of opinion and analysis pieces have been published over the last few years.33, 36, 37, 43-46  
 
The analysis of existing machine learning algorithms and frameworks suggest that the analysis of 
static data after the acquisition and active learning during the experiment require considerably different 
methods. Analysis of static data sets can be performed using an immense variety of supervised, semi-
supervised, and unsupervised methods towards the goals of semantic segmentation, regression, clustering, 
etc. These methods allow researchers to explore internal data structure, establish correlations between data 
and labels, or establish the causal links between multiple data channels. However, many of these methods 
will perform poorly in dynamic environments due to out-of-distribution shifts. In the context of microscopy, 
a deep learning network trained on one data set will generally perform poorly on the data set obtained on 
the same material under different imaging conditions. Perhaps even more fundamentally, supervised ML 
methods require fully labeled data sets for analysis, limiting the range of experimental tasks they can be 
applied to. 

5 
 
 
Recently, we have critically explored the potential of machine learning methods for automated 
microscopies.44 Here, we illustrate these approaches for SPM (Figure 1) and demonstrate the development 
of ML-based experimental workflows based on Bayesian methods. We discuss the AE in microscopy based 
on the (explicit or implicit) prior knowledge involved in the experiment design, the knowledge used during 
the experiment, and the goal of the experiment (reward). We note that all three components including the 
reward should be established explicitly prior to the initial definition of the experimental workflow, building 
the required ML components, testing on the pre-acquired “ground truth” data, and deployments on an 
operational microscope.    
 
 
Figure 1. Machine learning workflows designed for automated SPM. FerroBOT and Feature-discovery 
algorithms are based on decision making, e.g., application of bias pulse or spectroscopic measurement, 
based on predefined rules on a line by line or image by image basis. Comparatively, in active learning the 
operators define what aspects of the measured spectral signal are of interest and the algorithms discovers 
what microstructural elements exhibit this behavior. Finally, in hypothesis learning, the algorithm optimizes 
the function of interest over a certain parameter space if physical model of this behavior (structured 
Gaussian Process) or multiple competing models (hypothesis learning) models of this behavior are 
available. Such examples can include optimization of microscope resolution as a function of tuning 
parameters, or exploring the growth mechanism of ferroelectric domains as a function of probe bias pulse 
amplitude and pulse width.  

6 
 
 
Results and Discussion 
1. Why automated experiment  
 
To illustrate the concepts that emerge in the context of the automated experiment, let us explore a 
particular experimental workflow utilizing the example of Piezoresponse Force Microscopy (PFM) imaging 
and spectroscopy. However, we note that the logic espoused here applies to any other probe method 
including other SPM modalities, scanning transmission electron microscopy (STEM), or optical and mass-
spectrometric chemical imaging methods. 
 
PFM is a functional SPM mode for probing local electromechanical properties of piezoelectric and 
ferroelectric materials. In a PFM measurement, a conductive probe tip is brought into contact with a sample 
and an AC bias is applied to the tip, resulting in local expansion or contraction of the sample. This 
interaction force between tip and sample is due to the converse piezoelectric effect, and is detected by an 
optical beam photodiode system. As such, the sample’s piezoelectric response is measured as an amplitude 
and phase signal corresponding to the polarization magnitude and orientation, respectively. PFM imaging 
mode is when the tip is scanned across the sample, and the piezoelectric response (piezoresponse) at each 
pixel is simultaneously recorded. This mode allows mapping of ferroelectric domain structures. PFM 
switching spectroscopy mode—in which the AC bias is superimposed onto a triangular sweep DC bias 
waveform—allows measuring the piezoresponse as a function of DC bias, namely, piezoresponse-voltage 
hysteresis loops, at each pixel of an image.  Parameters encoded in the piezoresponse-voltage hysteresis 
loops, e.g. coercive field, nucleation bias, loop area/width, and remnant polarization, can be extracted and 
plotted as maps to correlate with topography and/or PFM images.47   
 
As noted earlier, while here we discuss the specific case of the PFM, the same logic can be applied 
to any other imaging -spectroscopy methods pairs based on sequential spectral acquisitions, for example 
scanning tunneling microscopy and spectroscopy, optical imaging and nanoindentation, imaging and local 
chemical analysis via mass spectrometry, and many others. The key to the subsequent discussions are the 
timescales involved in the measurements, and the degree to which the measurement affects the material. 
These considerations affect the time budget and the feasibility of the experiment, respectively. For example, 
in nanoindentation measurements, mapping mechanical properties on a dense grid is impossible, since the 
material gets irreversibly deformed.  
 

7 
 
 
Figure 2. (a) Topographic and Piezoresponse force microscopy (b) amplitude and (c) phase images of the 
ferroelectric PbTiO3 film. (d) Piezoresponse map of PFM switching spectroscopy data, (e), (f) hysteresis 
loops from selected locations in (d). (g) Piezoresponse force spectroscopy on the dense spatial grid of points 
gives rise to the 3D data set that can be visualized using dimensionality reduction methods, for example 
principal component analysis (PCA). (h) PCA components define the behaviors and (i) The PCA weights 
illustrate the spatial variability of specific behaviors. Adapted in part with permission from Ref [48], 
Copyright 2022 Springer Nature. 
 
 
Consider an experimental scenario where we would like to explore specific functionalities of a 
material, for example polarization switching or mechanical properties, and determine the relationship 
between this property and the material’s domain structure and/or topography. An example of PFM imaging 
and spectroscopy is illustrated in Figure 2.48 Here, the surface topography image in Figure 2 (a) illustrates 
several topographical features associated both with the ferroelastic domain walls49, 50 and the intrinsic 
material morphology. The corresponding PFM amplitude image shows the map of the electromechanical 
activity of the surface, with the in-plane domain being dark and out of plane domains being bright. The 
dark meandering lines on the image correspond to the ferroelectric walls between upward- and downward 
polarized out of plane domains.  

8 
 
 
Following the mapping of the topography and PFM images, the microscope can be configured to 
perform spectroscopic measurements. Originally, these measurements were implemented manually with 
the human-operator based selection of locations for spectroscopy.51-53 In 2006, an approach for the 
spectroscopy grid measurements in PFM, or switching spectroscopy PFM, was introduced.54, 55 In this, 
similar to force volume or CITS imaging, the individual spectra are collected over a rectangular grid of 
points and the resultant 3- or higher dimensional data set is analyzed by machine learning or physics-based 
methods.56, 57 However, this approach can be limited by the measurement time. Secondly and even more 
importantly, the measurements can change the material (or tip), from subtle and often reversible changes 
of domain structure during polarization switching to irreversible damage using nanoindentation. While the 
changes in tip state are readily identifiable as contrast change and changes in material domain structure are 
easily detectable by standard PFM imaging after the hyperspectral data acquisition, the discovery of the 
structure-property relationships becomes impossible. 
 
Hence, of interest is developing machine learning workflows that allow us to effectively sample 
the local materials behaviors based on topographic and PFM data, imitating the point-and-click approach 
of early days. One required component for such workflows will be the programming interfaces (engineering 
controls) that allow the updates to control signals such as tip position and initiation of the spectroscopic 
measurements. By now, several commercial microscopes allow for Python-based plug-ins as a part of the 
software architecture, and this trend is expected to continue . Alternatively, multiple work-around solutions 
based on partial control of microscope functions has been instantiated. The second component are post-
acquisition analysis methods that can convert the measurements taken over the non-rectangular grids to the 
standard 2D images amenable to human perception. This can be accomplished via compressed sensing,58, 
59 Gaussian Processing (to be discussed below), or other interpolation methods. However, the third and key 
element is the selection of the measurement points, based on the information available before the 
experiment (i.e., topography and amplitude images, and perhaps data from similar samples), (potentially) 
decisions made upon observations during the experiment (e.g., human operator assessment of hysteresis 
loops), and the perceived reward of the experiment. 
 
Here, we consider a typical exploratory strategy of a prototypical human operator. If interested in 
polarization switching at specific microstructural elements, the operator expects to obtain zero signal in the 
dark regions with purely in-plane polarization. However, given the uncertainty of the microscope 
performance, possible presence of the baseline signal due to the electrostatic interactions,60-62 shear effects, 
and so forth, it is a good practice to acquire several measurements over the dark regions and make sure that 
responses are close to zero or consistent (and hence baseline can be subtracted). As a second step, the 
obvious next target for exploration are the regions with the stripe-like contrast corresponding to dense a-c 
domain regions that occupy most of the image. Here, the operator again explores the hysteresis loops as 

9 
 
potentially related to pinning phenomena and ferroelastic wall dynamics. However, if the measurements 
yield consistent spectroscopic response over similar looking regions, the continuous experiments become 
redundant. With understanding of polarization switching behaviors in these regions achieved, the operator 
can proceed to explore other objects of interest, e.g., regions of ferroelectric domain walls with high 
curvature or crystallographically incompatible junctions between ferroelastic domains. For the former, we 
can expect to explore the role of flexoelectric coupling on wall properties while for the latter the local 
symmetry increases and transition to the paraelectric phases are possible. Note that while two first steps 
were driven by the motivation to characterize the instrument performance and explore statistically 
significant features within the image, the subsequent selection is predicated on the specific, and often highly 
specialized theories, within a specific scientific domain. The choice of these theories is informed by the 
prior knowledge of the operator. At the same time, implicit in this discussion is the concept of reward – 
which in this case is scientific discovery. 
 
In this discussion, we illustrated that the experimental strategy in these cases is determined by 
several elements. It is informed by the prior knowledge of the human operator that interprets the image in 
terms of physical descriptors and builds a likely picture of responses. It is driven by the perceived reward 
of the experiment, whether pure exploration of possible functional behaviors, or interest towards specific 
object of interest. Curiously, rarely does the human operator consider the results of deep analysis of previous 
spectroscopy measurements during the experiment (beyond cursory visual examination) when selecting the 
location for the new ones. Hence, an interesting problem that is rarely explored is the search for 
microstructural elements that possess desired responses. With this introduction, we further proceed to 
explore possible strategies for automated experiment and introduce the sequence of Bayesian methods that 
incorporate data driven approaches and subsequently prior knowledge.  
 
2. 
Experiment based on prior knowledge 
 
It is instructive to discuss machine learning in an automated experiment, starting from examples of 
experimental workflows where objects of interest are known in advance. For example, defect identification 
in semiconductor wafers requires the full wafer surface to be imaged, requiring the scanning of multiple 
regions, stitching of the resultant images, and identifying the potential defect site(s). This problem is 
equivalent to the proverbial needle in a haystack and is solved via full grid search. It is important to note 
that if the defects are truly random, machine learning methods cannot offer any advantage in identifying 
them. Hence, in this case the automated experiment is equivalent to the grid search with a priori known 
target and no feedback, i.e., the experimental workflow does not change upon defect detection. 
 

10 
 
 
Figure 3: Realtime feedback within a piezoresponse force microscopy. a) Illustration of FerroBot 
triggering system utilizing a phase trigger and voltage pulse stimulus. b) Enhanced electromechanical 
response observed near pinned domain walls in PbTiO3 via FerroBot. c) Localized domain wall bending 
observed within PbSrTiO3 in-plane superstructure domains by deploying FerroBot. Adapted with 
permission from Ref [63], Copyright 2022 American Chemical Society. 
 
 
Automated experiments with feedback can be realized without machine learning as well. The 
example of such an approach is the “FerroBot” (Figure 3) technique,63 where the material state detected 
beneath the AFM tip is used as a real time feedback control for applying a stimulus, such as light, voltage, 
temperature, and pressure, in efforts to obtain localized control and modification of specific structures. 
Recently, we demonstrated enhanced electromechanical responses can be induced near pinned domain 
walls in PbTiO3 via FerroBot, where the PFM phase is utilized as feedback for applying short (5 ms) voltage 
pulses in the areas of interest, i.e. at domain walls as shown in Figure 3b. Furthermore, we extended this 
technique within the previously developed framework to Pb1-xSrxTiO3 in-plane superstructures to gain 
fundamental insight into the dynamics of domain wall motion in such complex domain structures (Figure 
3c). 
 
This framework can be extended further with ML methods incorporated into the workflow. An 
example of this approach can be the recent work of applying a deep convolutional neural network-based 
YOLOv3 (You Only Look Once) system as an object detector to find the locations of molecules in AFM 
images, subsequently allowing acquiring high-resolution images of selected molecules.34 Meanwhile, a 
Siamese neural network is applied to identify the same molecule in AFM images, keep tracking the imaged 
molecules and subsequently avoiding duplicated imaging of the same molecule.34 As another example, a 
support vector machine (SVM), a supervised kernel-based method for non-linear classification, was applied 
to identified ferroelectric and electrochemical systems, making real time classification and performing 
additional probing at ferroelectric domain walls.35 In scanning tunneling microscopy (STM), convolutional 
neural networks are employed to identified the tip condition, and upon the poor condition of tip, the program 

11 
 
interfaces with microscope software to perform tip conditioning until the desired tip functionalization is 
achieved.33, 36 The conditioning process can be optimized with reinforcement learning (RL) where anRL 
agent with sufficient training can automatically establish the rules of tip conditioning without human 
intervention.37 Recently, we combined a deep convolutional neural network for segmentation of the domain 
structures with a rotationally invariant autoencoders to explore the domain dynamics in model 
polycrystalline ferroelectric materials and disentangle the factors affecting the pinning efficiency of 
ferroelectric domain walls. The ResHedNet identifies ferroelectric domain walls in PFM images..64 
 
Here, it is important to highlight that the deep convolutional neural network (DCNN) used for the 
object recognition was trained prior to the experiment, and in this way represented prior knowledge in 
experiment planning. The state of the network did not change during the experiment and was not updated 
based on the experimental results. Similarly, the chosen actions upon the object detection were defined 
prior to the experiment. Hence, in this case the workflow utilizes ML component for detection of specific 
features but is not active learning. 
 
The limitation of this approach is that pretrained neural networks tend to be susceptible to out-of-
distribution effects. In this, the network trained for one specific imaging conditions will fail when the 
microscope imaging parameters change. This problem is now well recognized by the machine learning 
community in areas such as automated driving, medical imaging, and even dog vs. wolf recognition.65-69 
Several strategies for the minimization of the out of distribution drift have been explored based on the 
invariant risk minimization,70 Barlow twin concepts,71 and ensemble methods.72, 73 For microscope imaging, 
possible strategies include the introduction of the translational and scale invariances into the DCNN 
architecture that account for possible microscope distortions. However, methods based on strong physical 
priors incorporated as inferential biases in the network (i.e., we expect atoms to be point-like objects in 
electron microscopy and domain walls to be continuous in PFM) have not been significantly explored. Still, 
these strategies allow only for partial improvement. Secondly, even if successful, these strategies are 
insufficient once we are interested in specific functional behaviors. For example, they are insufficient to 
explore what will be the behaviors of specific microstructural elements, e.g., hysteresis loops over specific 
domain configurations. However, these direct strategies are not suited to answer questions such as which 
domain structure gives rise to the maximal hysteresis loop opening or strongest imprint.  
 
Hence, of interest are active learning methods where the knowledge of the system is updated during 
the experiment, and the experimental pathway is adjusted based on this new knowledge. From the ML 
perspective, this requires active learning methods, where the algorithm interacts with the data generation 
process rather than a static data set. Here, we discuss the basic principles and examples of Bayesian 
optimization based methods, one of the two major (along with the reinforcement learning) classes of active 
learning methods.  

12 
 
 
3. 
Basic principles of Gaussian processes and Bayesian optimization 
 
To introduce the automated experiment based on the active learning methods, we first discuss the 
basic principles of the Gaussian Process (GP) and Bayesian optimization (BO). Currently, there are multiple 
excellent reviews and books introducing GP from the mathematical viewpoint.74-77 However, very often 
these introductions are very mathematical in nature, and as the result, the basic principles of the BO, the 
intuition behind the BO, and perhaps even more importantly the limitation of existing methods, require 
considerable effort to understand. In this section, we introduce the GP first using a simple intuitive example, 
and then briefly illustrate the associated mathematical framework. 
 
As a simple example, consider the (unknown) scalar observations y on the 1D domain. These 
observations can represent the topography, current, electromechanical response along a single scan line in 
SPM, magnetization or polarization distribution along the 1D combinatorial spread library, or any other 
signal. The function f(x) that generates these observations is unknown to the external observer, and the task 
is to learn it in the smallest number of steps (measurements). The measurements are assumed to be taken 
sequentially, with the location xn of a measurement at step n chosen based on the results of measurements 
in the previous n locations, {x0, .. , xn-1}.  
 
Prior to the measurement, we do not know anything about the f(x), which effectively means that 
the y value is a random number and even the distribution from which these random numbers come is 
unknown. Clearly, this is not very helpful. The Gaussian Process framework makes two key assumptions 
about f(x), namely it assumes that (a) the values of f(x) belong to the same distribution and (b) the parameters 
of this distribution are correlated between adjacent locations. While the effects of (a) are not simple to 
illustrate and it rather postulates that we deal with the same type of process, (b) is very easy to illustrate as 
shown in Figure 4a where the bumps in x-range indicate that shorter distances have a stronger correlation. 
Now the function can still be anything, but there is obvious internal structure determined by the degree of 
correlations. 
 
The natural question is how we would know the degree of correlation in advance. In the GP method, 
it is assumed that the correlations are controlled by a kernel of a certain functional form. The typical 
examples of the kernel functions are radial basis function (RBF) and Matern kernels: 
 
𝑘𝑅𝐵𝐹(𝑥𝑖, 𝑥𝑗) = 𝜎 exp(−𝑑(𝑥𝑖, 𝑥𝑗)
2 2𝑙2
⁄
), 
 
 
 
 
 
(Eq 1) 
𝑘𝑀𝑎𝑡𝑒𝑟𝑛(𝑥𝑖, 𝑥𝑗) = 𝜎exp (−√5 ×
𝑑(𝑥𝑖,𝑥𝑗)
𝑙
) (1 + √5 ×
𝑑(𝑥𝑖,𝑥𝑗)
𝑙
+
5
3 ×
𝑑(𝑥𝑖,𝑥𝑗)
2
𝑙2
) 
 
(Eq 2) 
where 𝑑(∙, ∙) is the Euclidean distance, l is the kernel’s lengthscale, and 𝜎 is the output scale. 

13 
 
 
Note that all these kernel forms have parameters such as lengthscale l in RBF and Matern kernels. 
In GP problems, the form of the kernel is generally chosen prior to the experiment and its parameters are 
learned from data during the experiment. At the same time, if the data was fully known, the kernel would 
be equivalent to the correlation function parametrized by the prescribed functional form. 
 
 
Figure 4. (a) Observations of a scalar function y. (b-d) GP predictions sampled from the multivariate normal 
prior (see Eq. 3-4), i.e., before conditioning on observations, for different prior distributions over the length 
scale parameter l of the Matern kernel (see Eq. 2); assumes zero observational noise. The GP training is 
based on conditioning these prior predictive distributions on experimental data, i.e., only the traces that 
pass through the experimental points are chosen. Note the role of kernel length scale on the functions from 
the prior predictive distribution. In the GP, the kernel is learned from data. 
 
 
Finally, the last step of the GP construction is the generation of posterior predictive distributions at 
the new data points. This process (assuming no noise) is illustrated in Figure 5. Here, the measurement at 

14 
 
the location xi indicated by a cross mark that yields observation yi means that of all the possible functions 
only the ones for which f(xi) = yi are real and the other functions are discarded. With this step, our function 
f(x) is now defined at one location, but still can follow multiple forms away from it. 
 
More formally, the GP can be written as a probabilistic model of the form, 
𝑓 ~ 𝑀𝑉𝑁𝑜𝑟𝑚𝑎𝑙(𝑚, 𝐾), 
 
 
 
(Eq 3a) 
𝑦= 𝑓(𝑥) + 𝜖   
 
 
 
 
(Eq 3b) 
Here MVNormal stands for multivariate normal distribution and m and 𝐾 are prior mean and covariance 
functions. The former is usually set to 0 whereas for the latter, 𝐾𝑖𝑗= 𝑘(𝑥𝑖, 𝑥𝑗) where k is a kernel 
computation function such as the ones in Eq 1 and Eq 2 for RBF and Matern kernels. The 𝜖 is a normally 
distributed observational noise. We then place priors on the parameters of the selected kernel. The priors 
on the kernel parameters are defined based on the prior knowledge of the scale of output values and the 
characteristic lengthscale of the phenomena of interest. In the absence of such knowledge, for Matern or 
RBF kernel, we can define a weakly-informative prior to ensure that both output scale and lengthscale are 
positive real numbers, e.g. 
𝜎~𝐿𝑜𝑔𝑁𝑜𝑟𝑚𝑎𝑙(0, 1)  
 
 
 
(Eq 4a) 
𝑙~𝐿𝑜𝑔𝑁𝑜𝑟𝑚𝑎𝑙(0, 1) 
 
 
 
 
(Eq 4b) 
In Figure 4b-d, we show samples from the prior predictive distribution defined by Eq 3, that is, before 
conditioning our GP model on observations (before "training” it). Note how the samples shape in Figure 
4b-d vary depending on the chosen prior on the kernel length scale parameter (the output scale prior was 
the same in all cases).  
 
The right choice of priors on kernel parameters may significantly speed up the model training, 
which can be critical in the live experiments. In our toy example, Figure 4b demonstrates a reasonable 
choice of the length scale prior, whereas the length scales in Figure 4c-d are either too small (Figure 4c) or 
too large (Figure 4d) for the observations at hand. The observational noise can be absorbed into the 
computation of the kernel function both at training and prediction stages.  
 
Hence, the training process of GP model consists of inferring kernel parameters given the available 
observations. The inference can be done in a fully Bayesian way using the Hamiltonian Monte Carlo (HMC) 
sampling techniques, or it can be done using a maximum a posteriori (MAP) approximation. Multiple 
existing open-source software packages such as PyMC3,76 Pyro,78 and NumPyro79 provide these inference 
tools. After inferring the GP model parameters, we can use it to obtain probabilistic predictions of function 
values on new inputs. Specifically, we sample from the multivariate normal posterior over the model 
outputs at the provided new inputs 𝑋∗ (usually, a denser grid of points): 

15 
 
𝑓∗ ~ 𝑀𝑉𝑁𝑜𝑟𝑚𝑎𝑙(𝜇𝜽
post, Σ𝜽
post)  
 
 
 
(Eq 5a) 
𝜇𝜃
post = 𝑚(𝑋∗) + 𝐾(𝑋∗, 𝑋|𝜃)𝐾(𝑋, 𝑋|𝜃)−1(𝑦−𝑚(𝑋))  
(Eq 5b) 
Σ𝜃
post = 𝐾(𝑋∗, 𝑋∗|𝜃) −K(𝑋∗, 𝑋|𝜃)𝐾(𝑋, 𝑋|𝜃)−1𝐾(𝑋, 𝑋∗|𝜃)  
(Eq 5c) 
where  𝜃= {𝜎, 𝑙} are the inferred kernel parameters. Note that in the MAP approximation, we get a point 
estimate of kernel parameters and hence a single pair of 𝜇𝜃
post and Σ𝜃
post. In the fully Bayesian mode, we 
get a pair of 𝜇𝜃𝑖
post and Σ𝜃𝑖
post for each posterior sample with kernel parameters 𝜃𝑖.  Figure 5a shows the 
sampled predictions 𝑓∗ and posterior mean 𝜇𝜃
post for our 1D example as semi-transparent red lines and solid 
blue curve, respectively. The regions where sampled predictions diverge, such as between x=1.0 and x=2.0, 
are referred to as regions with high uncertainty. The latter can be easily computed by taking a variance of 
the predicted values at each point.  
 
 

16 
 
Figure 5. (a) GP predictions sampled from the multivariate normal posterior (see Eq. 5), i.e., after 
conditioning model on observations, and the GP posterior mean (Eq 5b). (b) The acquisition function 
derived from the posterior predictive distribution at a denser grid of points, according to Eq 7, with 𝑐2 = 1 
and 𝑐2 = 2. The maximum of acquisition function determines the next point to measure. Note that 
practically, we compute acquisition function only for points that have not been measured yet. (c) GP 
prediction after measuring the suggested point and (d) the corresponding acquisition function values. Note 
that the y-axis is rescaled compared to Figure 4. 
 
 
At this step, we incorporate the second key element of active learning. Specifically, the GP posterior 
predictive distribution is used to derive an acquisition function for selecting the next point to measure, 
 
𝑥𝑛𝑒𝑥𝑡= arg max
𝐱
1
𝑀∑
𝑎(𝜇𝜃𝑖
post, Σ𝜃𝑖
post)
𝑀
𝑖=1
    
(Eq 6) 
where 𝑎 is a pre-selected acquisition function and M is the number of posterior samples with kernel 
parameters. For the MAP approximation, M = 1. We can easily define our own simple acquisition function 
by taking a linear combination of posterior mean, 𝜇𝜽
post, and uncertainty, √diag(Σ𝜽
post), 
𝑎= 𝑐1𝜇𝜽
post + 𝑐2√diag(Σ𝜽
post)  
 
(Eq 7) 
where 𝑐1 = {0, 1} and 𝑐2 ≥0. The diag(Σ𝜽
post) corresponds to the diagonal elements of the covariance 
matrix containing variances of the predicted variables whose square root is a standard deviation 
(‘uncertainty’). We note that instead of 𝜇𝜽
post  and diag(Σ𝜽
post) in Eq 7, one could in principle use the mean, 
𝑓̅∗, and variance,𝕍[𝑓∗], of predictions sampled from the multivariate normal posterior at each point.  
 
When 𝑐1 = 0 and 𝑐2 = 1, we are in the exploratory regime. In this case, the algorithm seeks to 
minimize the total uncertainty about the system with the minimal number of steps. During the iterative 
process, the GP builds the reconstruction of the function, calculates the uncertainty, and suggest the next 
measurement point in which uncertainty is maximal. The process is iterated until uncertainty falls to a 
required level, or experimental budget (the number of points) is exhausted. When 𝑐1 = 1 and 𝑐2 ≥0, we 
are in the optimization regime, that is, we want to discover regions where the value of the function is 
maximal – sometimes referred to as the exploitation problem. The pure, or greedy, exploitation problem 
(𝑐1 = 1, 𝑐2 = 0) involves iterative measurements at the locations where the function is predicted to be 
maximal. The problem with this approach is that it gets trivially trapped into local maxima, without offering 
much advantages compared to simple gradient ascent. Hence, in practice, one uses the exploration-

17 
 
exploitation tradeoff, which is at the heart of the Bayesian optimization. For Eq 7, this corresponds to 𝑐1 =
1 and 𝑐2 > 0, and translates into the upper confidence bound (UCB) acquisition function.  
 
We illustrate its application to our toy data in Figure 5b where the predicted function maximum is 
at 𝑥≈−0.5. However, after considering the uncertainty in the prediction, the UCB acquisition function 
suggests exploring a point at 𝑥≈1.5 where potentially a true function maximum is located. We then 
perform a measurement in the suggested point and add the measured value to the initial training data. The 
updated training data is used to derive the new posterior predictive distribution (Figure 5c) and the 
corresponding acquisition function (Figure 5d). Here, after identifying what appears to be a true maximum, 
the algorithm suggests exploring points in its vicinity.  
Another type of acquisition function frequently used in Bayesian optimization is the expected 
improvement (EI).80 It estimates how much improvement one can get over the current ‘best’ point (for the 
maximization problems, it is the largest value observed so far). Unlike the UCB, the EI balances the 
exploration-exploitation tradeoff automatically. Other possible choices for the acquisition function are 
entropy search81 and knowledge gradient,82 although they can be too computationally expensive for online 
deployment on a microscope (i.e., potentially too high latency). A more in-depth technical description of 
the acquisition functions for Bayesian optimization can be found in the reviews by Frazier83 and de Freitas.84  
 
For the following discussion, we recap the major characteristics of the simple GP/BO algorithms, 
namely (a) we assume the existence of a non-observable ground truth function defined over a certain 
domain, (a) the measured data is assumed to be generated by the sampling from this function as an 
independent and identically distributed (i.i.d) process, (b) the spatial correlations are determined by a kernel 
of known functional form (c) the parameters of which is discovered from experiment and (d) the active 
learning process is driven by the balance of exploration and exploitation defined by the acquisition function. 
 
4. 
GP in experiment 
 
With this introduction to GP, we now discuss its application in imaging and spectroscopy 
experiments. To define the automated experiment workflow, we cast the microscope operation to the 
Bayesian Optimization (BO) problem. For this, we define the parameter space, i.e., what are the 
experimental knobs available for the ML algorithm, and what is the function to be discovered/optimized. 
Note that the reward of the experiment is defined via the selection of the function to be optimized. For 
example, the experiment may seek to discover regions with maximal polarization and then the reward 
function is polarization itself, regions with minimal polarization, or polarization at some specific value. By 
the same token, the reward function can be more complex, e.g., regions with specific polarization pattern.  
 
As an example, we can consider microscope tuning in intermittent contact mode. Here, we aim to 
optimize the microscope performance as a function of the imaging parameters, for example the setpoint 

18 
 
value and driving amplitude. Based on the general physical considerations, we expect that for small setpoint 
values the area of the tip surface contact will be small and hence spatial resolution can be high. At the same 
time, long range forces will affect the measured signal, leading to smearing of the image. Comparatively, 
higher indentation forces result in stronger tip-surface interaction that now is dominated by local forces but 
lead to an increase of the contact area. Hence, in agreement with the experimental practices over 30 years 
of AFM history, we expect the optimal resolution to be achieved for certain intermediate values of these 
parameters. This microscope parameters define the parameter space of the BO problem. To avoid the risk 
to the equipment, we can introduce additional soft or hard restrictions on the extreme values. 
 
The second component of BO is the function to be optimized. Here, it can be defined as resolution 
(which then needs to be determined form imaging or line scan data), noise, or frequency of the loss lines. 
With the function defined, GP will optimize the microscope resolution by dynamically adjusting the 
imaging parameters. 
 
Another example of GP applications in microscopy is imaging or spectroscopic imaging. 
Traditionally, imaging in SPM is performed via raster scanning the region on the surface, giving rise to the 
rectangular array of sampling points. Hyperspectral imaging modes such as force volume measurements, 
CITS, or time- and voltage spectroscopies in PFM are performed on rectangular grids in a point-by-point 
mode. Hence, the natural question is whether more effective scan trajectories can be implemented for 2D 
scanning, and particularly, whether the locations for the spectroscopy measurements can be chosen more 
effectively. As such, we have recently demonstrated the use of coarse spiral scanning geometries during 
imaging to effectively increase the scan speed and reduce the tip-sample interaction (Figure 6). Specifically, 
we introduce the approach for fast scanning PFM based on the reconstruction of sparse spiral scans using 
two reconstruction techniques, compressive sensing and Gaussian processing, resulting in strong 
reconstructions with less than 6% error for GP reconstructions. Most notably, we achieve a high degree of 
image reconstruction accuracy while reducing the data collection by a factor of 5.8, ultimately enabling an 
increase in scan speed. Here, GP reconstructions were implemented for predefined sampling patterns. 
However, this technique can be extended to unknown or arbitrary scan patterns in conjunction with batch 
updates, i.e., the microscope collects a batch of points for determining updated locations for investigation.  
 

19 
 
 
Figure 6: Gaussian process of scanning probe and electron microscopies. a) Ground truth PFM image of 
CuInP2S6, b) predefined coarse spiral scanning pattern with 16 spirals and the c) corresponding GP 
reconstruction. Adapted with permission from Ref [85], Copyright 2020 Wiley. d) Ground truth of high 
density piezoresponse spectroscopy grid illustrating spatial dependence of normalized hysteresis loop area. 
Note, red dots in panel (d) indicate locations of maximum normalized hysteresis loop opening (>0.8). e) 
GP prediction after 40 steps (400 pixels measured) of areas with maximum hysteresis loop opening. f) 
Panels (d) and (e) overlaid to illustrate accuracy of discovered large loop hysteresis area locations. Adapted 
in part with permission from Ref [44], Copyright 2021 American Chemical Society. 
 
 
These approaches are illustrated in Figure 6.44 Figure 6 (a-c) illustrate the GP reconstruction of the 
image based on a fixed sparse scanning pattern. Here, the scanning pattern is selected prior to the 
experiment, the signal is sampled across the corresponding pathway, and GP is used to reconstruct the 
image. The comparison between the ground truth (a) and reconstruction (c) illustrates the quality of this 
process – while the small details are lost, the large-scale features of the image are clearly visible. We note 
that in contrast to conventional computer vision approaches such as inpainting, the GP makes it easier to 
incorporate prior knowledge about the system and its prediction comes with quantified uncertainty for each 
predicted point, which can be used to decide where to measure next in the automated experiment. 
 
Shown in the Figure 6 (d-f) are the results of the active GP learning of hysteresis loop area in the 
PFM spectroscopy measurements. Here, the hysteresis loop measurements were performed in specific 
locations, and the GP was used to identify the next batch of locations to perform the measurements. In this 
case, the GP was realized in the batch mode to allow for efficient use of the computational resources. Note 
that the comparison of the reconstructed image with the ground truth image (i.e., acquired over the dense 

20 
 
grid of points) suggest that the active experiment results are fairly poor – while the large-scale features are 
reproduced, the fine contrast details associated with specific domain walls are not captured in GP 
reconstruction.  
 
While continuing the GP driven active learning experiment to many experimental samples can yield 
better results, there are several significant limitations. First and foremost, GP methods are computationally 
intensive and in the context of experiment of Figure 6 (d-f) required the use of a GPU server. Secondly, in 
SPM the scanning process is associated with the nonlinearities and drifts, meaning that exploring the sample 
surface in arbitrary sequence introduces a certain level of positional disorder. Furthermore, the use of batch 
updates further necessitates the selection of pathfinder function, i.e., defining the sampling sequence under 
the constraints of microscope operation, representing a known example of NP hard problem that we never 
come back exactly where we were. Finally, GP will still be expected to require a considerable number of 
sampling points, and although it can reduce experimental budget to 10-30% of grid measurements, the 
tradeoff is that it renders the experimental procedure considerably more complex.86 
 
Overall, the results shown above yield several conclusions. For scanning with non-rectangular 
trajectories with fixed sampling points, the GP method allows for image reconstruction and offers less then 
order of magnitude improvement in sampling. However, for the active experiment the gain in terms of 
minimizing the number of sampling point is comparable, whereas the complexity of the experiment both 
from the instrumental and computational perspective is considerable. Overall, the use of simple GP for 
active learning in imaging clearly did not bring advantage sufficient to make it a part of the experiment. 
 
The origins of this behavior can be traced directly to the basic postulated of GP as discussed in 
section 3. In the examples above, we aimed to explore the black box function using either predefined 
measurement sequence, or active learning experiment. The GP learns to interpolate the function of interest 
via learning the kernel function, which is effectively a parametrized form of the correlation function. The 
image as shown in Fig. 6 contains multiple details at all length scales which cannot be defined via a single 
correlation function. Hence, the rough details are reconstructed, but finer details associated with different 
length scales remain invisible. More importantly, since simple GP uses a single kernel, discovering the 
large-scale details will reject the finer details, effectively acting as a low-pass filter.  
 
One of the ways to improve the GP/BO is to introduce more complex kernel functions allowing for 
the different functional forms in the image or choose a mixture of kernels so that the correct kernel and its 
parameters are learnt during the experiment. In this case, the kernel function will contain the information 
about materials. For example, spectral kernels can be well-suited for images with atomic periodicity that 
can naturally be represented as superposition of the Fourier components. However, this direction rapidly 
becomes computationally intractable. From the experimental viewpoint, the choice of kernel then starts to 
be predicted on the expectations on system behavior, i.e., rely on experimentalist biases. 

21 
 
 
Hence, the simple GP/BO method while being very useful for microscope tuning and fixed-point 
reconstructions, are insufficient for more complex active learning workflows. The reason for this is that 
they are purely data driven strategies that impose certain constraints on the function to be discovered, and 
these constraints are purely correlative in nature. Comparatively in most applications, we have access to 
other data or some information on physical laws acting within the system. Examples of the BO strategies 
that use these methods are discussed in subsequent sections. 
 
5. 
Deep kernel learning for automated discovery 
 
In microscopy (or any other) experiment, we almost never consider the problem of black box 
exploration, thus immediately going beyond the examples in Section 4. When selecting material, we 
typically have anticipation of what type of behaviors it is likely to manifest and have specific research goals 
in mind. These considerations define our prior knowledge before the experiment and reward that drives the 
experiment. On a more local level (once material and reward are selected), the same principle applies. 
Typically, we utilize successive measurement to obtain progressively deeper insight into behaviors of 
interest by choosing next regions for exploration. For example, in SPM experiments, optical microscopy is 
often used to identify the regions of interest for detailed studies. Similarly, once the topographic/functional 
maps of the surface are obtained, they can be used to identify the regions of interest to perform spectroscopic 
measurements. In the hysteresis loop measurements experiment exemplified in Section 2, the observed 
domain structure was used to select locations for spectroscopic measurements. 
 
In the following discussion, we disambiguate two very important scenarios for automated 
experiments. In the first scenario, we know in advance what objects of interest in the topographic or 
functional image we are interested in. For example, we may choose to explore the polarization switching at 
the domain walls as a function of local surface curvature, or any descriptor that can be derived from 
observations. This corresponds to the case discussed in Section 2, and we refer to it as direct automated 
experiment problem. 
 
The second case is the case of automated discovery (or inverse automated experiment problem), 
where we are interested in certain spectroscopic responses, and aim to discover the microstructural elements 
at which they manifest, see Figure 1. This problem can be cast as a pure exploratory discovery experiment, 
in which we aim to maximize the variability of observed responses. Alternatively, the experiment can be 
developed so that the algorithm targets the discovery of regions on the sample surface where the response 
satisfies certain criteria. These experimental workflows can be realized via deep kernel learning (DKL). 
Below, we briefly summarize the DKL principles and illustrate its application for ferroelectric materials 
discovery. 

22 
 
 
DKL can be represented as a combination of deep neural networks and Gaussian Process. Here, the 
neural network is used to discover the low-dimensional representation of data, commonly referred to as 
embedding vectors or latent variables. The Gaussian Process operates over the discovered low dimensional 
space of the latent variables. Formally, the deep kernel is defined as 
𝑘𝐷𝐾𝐿(𝑥𝑖, 𝑥𝑗|𝑤, 𝜃) = 𝑘𝑏𝑎𝑠𝑒(𝑔(𝑥𝑖|𝑤), 𝑔(𝑥𝑗|𝑤)|𝜃)  
 
(Eq 8) 
where 𝑔 is a neural network with weights 𝑤 and 𝑘𝑏𝑎𝑠𝑒 is a standard GP kernel such as Matern or RBF. 
Hence, the deep kernel can be used as a drop-in replacement of the standard GP kernel in Eq. 3-5. We also 
note that an important difference between DKL and the GP applied to the PCA, or NMF-reduced image 
data is that in DKL, the parameters of the neural network and GP are inferred jointly, in an end-to-end 
fashion, and therefore, the ‘reduction’ of high-dimensional image data is conditioned on the observed 
physical functionality.  
 
The DKL-driven experiment proceeds as follows. In the first stage of experiment, the microscope 
collects the surface topography (or functional) 2D image over the relatively large field of view. This is 
considered to be a relatively ‘fast’ measurement. With this information in hand, the algorithm represents 
the image as a collection of patches centered at individual pixels (Fig. 7a). These patches form a spatial 
structure descriptor. Based on the nature of the measurement, the patch can be selected from one 
information channel, or represent several channels. For example, in band excitation Piezoresponse Force 
Microscopy the patch can be NxNx1 PFM amplitude signal, or NxNx3 amplitude, phase, and resonant 
frequency stack. For MxM image, this procedure yields ~(M-N)2 patches. Note that while more complex 
spatial descriptors can be used (e.g., via the positional embeddings, etc.), these approaches have not yet 
been explored for physical data analysis. 
Next, we select a scalarizer function that will convert a measured spectrum into a scalar physical 
descriptor. The acquisition of such spectra is considered to be a ‘slow’ measurement. The scalarizer defines 
the measure of physical interest to the response and acts as a reward towards the specific behavior in the 
experiment. The scalarizer can be created in almost unlimited number of ways. For example, it can be based 
on the gross characteristic of the spectrum, such as area under curve, integrated intensity within certain 
energy range, area or width of hysteresis loop (Fig 7b). It can incorporate the physical model and physics-
based analysis, for example converting predicted spectrum to specific materials parameters. It can be based 
on hybrid criteria defined via combinations of functional fits, decision trees, etc. Finally, it can be crowd 
sourced – if the neural network has been trained by human labelled data, or other form of expert system can 
be used. Ultimately however, the scalarizer should define the measure of physical interest much like the 
human operator would do. 
 
To initialize the DKL algorithm, a few spectrums are collected at randomly selected pixels. With 
this, the DKL algorithm is trained using patches centered in those pixels as inputs and the scalarized 

23 
 
spectrums as targets. This allows DKL to learn a probabilistic relationship between these available input 
patches representing structural features and physical behavior of interest. The trained DKL model is then 
used to predict the property of interest in for the remaining image patches (for which there are no measured 
spectrums yet). We note that the DKL model can be also used in the so-called multi-output regime to try 
reconstructing the entire spectrums over the field of view, but the computational cost is usually prohibitive 
for the implementations in real time. Because the DKL prediction is probabilistic, it can be used to derive 
the acquisition function (see Eq. 6) for selecting the next measurement location (image patch). Once the 
next measurement is performed, the corresponding image patch and the scalarized spectrum are added to 
the training data and the process is repeated iteratively until experimental budget is exhausted or the 
required predictability is achieved. 
 
An example of DKL-based automated experiment in scanning probe microscopy is shown in Fig. 
7(c-e). Here, the structure-property relationship of a PbTiO3 ferroelectric thin film is explored with DKL 
driven band excitation piezoresponse spectroscopy (BEPS) measurement. The piezoresponse force 
microscopy amplitude image showing ferroelectric and ferroelastic domain structures is used to created 
structural descriptor here, and the scalarizer physical descriptor is the loop area of piezoresponse vs. voltage 
hysteresis loop. In this case, the DKL actively learns the relationship between local domain structure and 
corresponding hysteresis loop area. The results in Figure 7d and 7e show the DKL exploration points based 
on on-field hysteresis loop area and off-field hysteresis loop area, respectively, which indicate that DKL 
discovered the object of interest is ferroelectric and ferroelastic domain walls. Noteworthily, DKL model 
does not contain physical knowledge and there is no prior information about the importance of domain 
walls in a ferroelectric material; nonetheless, DKL discovered that the object of interest in this material is 
domain wall during the measurement. In addition, the different exploration points under on- and off-field 
conditions—exploration points concentrate around 180o ferroelectric domain walls under on-field condition 
(Figure 7d) and around non-180o domain walls under off-field conditions (Figure 7e) under off-field 
condition—suggest that the structure–hysteresis relationship varies under different circumstances (on- or 
off-field).   
 
 
 

24 
 
 
 
Figure 7. DKL-based automated experiment in scanning probe microscopy. (a) An experimental 
(‘structural’) image over a relatively large field of view is split it into a set of patches extracted at each 
pixel. (b) The scalarizer function is created to convert a spectrum (measured in each patch) into a scalar 
physical descriptor associated with a physical behavior of interest. (c) At each step of the automated 
experiment, the DKL model learns a relationship between image patches for which the hysteresis loops are 
already measured and the corresponding property of interest (extracted from those loops via a scalarizer) 
and makes a probabilistic prediction about the next measurement location. (c) schematic showing 
implement of DKL in operating SPM. (d, e) Example of the DKL-sampled points during the automated 
experiment in the on- (c) and off- (e) field regimes overlaid with a BEPFM amplitude image. Adapted in 
part with permission from Ref [48], Copyright 2022 Springer Nature. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
In cases where multiple image channels are available (e.g., topography, phase, etc.), the DKL can 
be used to identify channel with the best predictive capacity of the physical property of interest based on 
the predictive uncertainty. Generally, the channel with better predictive capacity leads to the faster decay 
of the overall posterior variance, which allows discarding some of the redundant channels in the automated 
experiment. 
 
6. 
Bayesian Inference for structured probabilistic models 

25 
 
 
With the basis data driven GP and its extension to the DKL introduced, we discuss the second 
aspect of the Bayesian methods, namely Bayesian inference. One of the common tasks in data analysis is 
fitting the data to a specific model. In band excitation PFM, we aim to reconstruct the parameters of the 
simple harmonic oscillator from the amplitude-frequency curve. In AFM force-distance measurement, the 
indentation curve is used to calculate the elastic properties of materials, whereas force in the non-contact 
regime are used to estimate the long range electrostatic or magnetic interactions. 
 
The classical and well familiar approach for analysis of such data when the model, meaning the 
analytical or numerical relationship linking the parameters of interest and measured data is known, is the 
least squares (LS) approach. In this approach, we chose the function f(x) which can be evaluated at points 
xi to yield function values fi, and define the mean squared error (MSE) as 
𝑀𝑆𝐸= ∑[𝑦𝑖−𝑓(𝑥𝑖, 𝑎1, … 𝑎𝑛)]2  
𝑖
  
 
 
 
(Eq 9) 
 
During the fit, we aim to minimize the MSE by varying the parameters of the model a1, … an. This 
utilizes an optimization algorithm such as the Levenberg–Marquardt87 algorithm, which approximates the 
changes to function values by a first order (linear) change based on the computed gradient of the function 
with respect to each fitting parameter. If the parameter values are chosen close to their true values, this 
method converges to the global minima; but if multiple minima are present and the initial priors input to 
the algorithm are not close to their ideal values, local minima will instead be found. Once the optimization 
is complete, the parameter values are assumed to represent the values that “best” fit the physical equation 
provided. 
 
The delineated approach has several weaknesses. Practically, choosing the parameters well outside 
of their true values often leads to the spurious fits. Secondly, the functional form of the behaviors of interest 
is not always exactly known, and it is common to compare fits by several models and choose the one that 
offers least error. However, on an even more fundamental level, the least square fitting method does not 
allow one to express confidence of possible parameter values before the fit is undertaken. In other words, 
the parameter can only be taken as either free or fixed. In some implementations, it is possible to add rigid 
constraints (e.g., non-negativity). After the fit, parameters can be compared to physical expectations, and 
based on these, the model can be accepted or rejected. For example, cantilever resonance peaks should have 
positive quality factor and amplitude, for fitting optical dielectric constants, we expect positive values, etc. 
However, this physical prior knowledge is used during the interpretation stage, but not normally factored 
into the analysis. 
 
An elegant and universal way to incorporate prior knowledge into the fit is via the use of Bayesian 
Inference (BI) methods. In BI, we assume that we know the relationship of the model connecting the 
measured signal to system parameters. However, the parameters are now given in the form of their prior 
distributions. If a certain parameter is very well known, the corresponding distribution can be taken to be 

26 
 
very narrow. If the parameter is poorly known, the distribution can be a broad Gaussian, Semi-Gaussian (if 
e.g., positively defined), or uniform (if constrained within certain interval). Importantly, the prior 
distributions can be estimated much more precisely from previous measurements, literature data, etc. 
Furthermore, they can be also multimodal. For example, for ferroelectric material the polarization can be 
+P and -P, and the corresponding prior distribution is bimodal. 
 
The combination of the model and prior distributions on the parameter values is defined even before 
the experiment and defines the prior knowledge about the system. The experimental data provides new data 
on the system behavior. The essence of the BI method is that given the new data, the priors are updated to 
yield posterior distributions, which are narrower than the prior. This narrowing reflects the increased 
knowledge about the system derived as the result of the experiment.  
 
Note that in the classical statistical community, this was traditionally perceived as the limitation of 
BI, i.e., that it required us to put prior distributions on variables. This consideration was traditionally 
perceived as a weakness compared to the frequentist (i.e., only experiment-based measures). However, in 
the physical sciences this knowledge is inherent, and hence BI is ideally matched to applications in the 
physics domain. Perhaps even more importantly, the in-depth comparison of the Bayesian and frequentist 
methods suggest that many of the common statistical criteria (p-values, etc.) implicitly rely on specific prior 
hypotheses, as analyzed in detail by Kruschke.88 However, these frequentist methods lack flexibility to 
express the complex prior structure.  
 
In both frequentist and Bayesian approaches, a common challenge is that there is not one model 
but multiple models that can be used to describe any given dataset. In such circumstances, it becomes 
important then to determine which model is most likely given the data. Of course, simply computing and 
comparing the loss via equation (1) amongst different models is not particularly helpful, because it will 
favor more flexible models over those with less degrees of freedom. As such, one needs a metric that can 
compare different models with respect to the number of degrees of freedom and penalize those extra degrees 
of freedom for each additional reduction in loss they provide.  
 
There are a variety of approaches, such as the Akaike information criterion (AIC), but a recently 
developed approach by Watanabe, termed the widely applicable information criterion (WAIC)89, extends 
this thinking to a more strictly Bayesian setting. Here, assume we have several models Mk = M1, …, MN. 
Each model has i parameters 𝜃𝑖
𝑘, each parameter having a prior distribution that can be informative or non-
informative. We then compute the posteriors of the parameters based on the datasets to obtain posteriors 
over the parameters 𝜃𝑖
𝑘. This step is the most computationally expensive, and usually undertaken with some 
form of sampling, such as Markov-chain Monte-Carlo (MCMC), Hamiltonian Monte-Carlo, No U-Turn 
Sampling, or other approaches. With these posteriors, we can calculate the log likelihood (LL), which is 

27 
 
simply the probability of datapoint yi given some model parameters 𝜃, and for the Bayesian case, can be 
written as90 
𝐿𝐿= ∑
𝑙𝑜𝑔
𝑛
𝑖=1
 (
1
𝑆 ∑
𝑝(𝑦𝑖|𝜃𝑆)
𝑆
𝑠=1
)  
 
 
(Eq 10)  
Where there are S simulation draws and n datapoints in total. Given that we already have the posteriors for 
the parameters, we can use those in the simulation draws to easily compute the LL. We then compute the 
penalty term for the degrees of freedom in the model (effective number of parameters), which we denote 
as pWAIC, and is calculated by 
𝑝𝑊𝐴𝐼𝐶= ∑
var𝑝𝑜𝑠𝑡log(𝑝(𝑦𝑖|𝜃)) 
𝑛
𝑖=1
 
 
 
(Eq 11)  
Where var is the variance and can be calculated as var = 𝑉𝑠𝑆𝑎𝑠=
1
𝑆−1 ∑
(𝑎𝑠− 𝑎̅)2
𝑆
𝑠=1
. This is used 
precisely because the effective number of parameters strongly depends on the variance of the parameters. 
Then the WAIC is calculated as WAIC = LL – pWAIC. The probability of the models p(Mi) can then be 
calculated via an approach defined in ref91 which uses an AIC-type weighting approach with Pseudo-
Bayesian model averaging. The advantage of the fully Bayesian model selection approach here is twofold. 
One, as discussed earlier, it enables us to incorporate priors on different model parameters, and therefore 
better inform the probabilities of the models, and second, it is more applicable for hierarchical models than 
the traditional point estimator approaches. In contrast to the traditional frequentist approach, the other 
relevant observation here is that the uncertainty of individual parameters within the model directly affects 
the model probability. 
To show its utility, a subset of authors has performed such Bayesian model selection in the case of 
both scanning probe microscopy (SPM) as well as electron microscopy. In SPM, we utilized this approach 
for determining whether a linear or nonlinear oscillator would better describe observed cantilever 
deflections on a thin film PbTiO3 sample,46 with Landau modeling suggesting that ferroelectric behavior 
could result in the observed mechanical nonlinearities. In Figure 8(a), simulated data is used to show how 
the traditional AIC scores vary as a function of cantilever nonlinearity and noise level, as compared with 
the smoother changes in the WAIC approach in Figure 8(b). An example curve from real data is shown in 
Figure 8(c), with the data as red circles, the (linear) simple harmonic oscillator fit in blue, and the 
(nonlinear) Duffing oscillator in black. By eye, it appears both models are very well suited to this data; 
however, WAIC scores consistently favor the Duffing oscillator model. 
The second example concerned atomically resolved images of domain walls in a BiFeO3 thin film 
sample92 with three distinct models for ferroelectric polarization being explored via Bayesian inference and 
model selection. This is illustrated in Figure 8(d-i), with the atomically resolved image of the 180° domain 
wall shown in Figure 8(d), the (perpendicular) component the polarization shown in Figure 8(e), and the 
wall profile shown in Figure 8(f). Running Bayesian inference enables posteriors to be retrieved based on 

28 
 
this data; the posteriors are plotted in Figure 8(g-i) and show that although some parameters are well defined 
with narrow, sharp peaks, such as the spontaneous polarizations Ps, others are more uncertain, such as the 
correlation length Lc. Practically, extending the use of these model selection approaches will require 
integrated computation-experiment workflows given the heavier computational demands of Bayesian 
inference. 
 
 
Figure 8. Bayesian inference and model selection in microscopy. Model selection in scanning probe 
microscopy is shown in (a-c). Here, we compare the traditional Akaike information criterion approach (a) 
with the more Bayesian approach (WAIC), in (b), for simulated data. The data is that of a nonlinear 
oscillator with varying levels of noise (vertical axis) and nonlinearity of the oscillation (horizontal axis), 
and the model selection is between that of a simple harmonic oscillator model and a Duffing (nonlinear) 
oscillator model. Color represents probability of the linear model. (c) Example spectrum, with the raw data 
in red, the simple harmonic oscillator prediction in blue and the Duffing oscillator prediction in black. An 
example of Bayesian inference for electron microscopy data is shown in (d-i) with the high angle annular 
dark field image of a 180° domain wall in BiFeO3 shown in (d), the associated (perpendicular component) 
polarization map in (e) and the wall profile extracted from this map in (f). Blue dots indicate the mean data 
and the color indicates 90% extend of the data. Posteriors after Bayesian inference are plotted for a 
particular choice of model in (g-i). these posteriors show considerable uncertainty around the parameter Lc, 

29 
 
the correlation length, whereas the spontaneous polarization appears known to significantly more 
confidence. Adapted with permission under a Creative Commons Attribution 4.0 International License (CC 
BY 4.0) from Ref [92].  
 
7. 
Structured Gaussian Processes and Hypothesis learning    
 
The Bayesian optimization approaches described above were either purely data driven, i.e., relying 
on the data obtained during the same experiment, or were using the proxy data to learn structure-property 
relationships. However, almost universal in many areas of physics, chemistry, and materials science is the 
existence of certain physical laws that describe the behaviors of interest across the corresponding parameter 
space. In rare cases such as Newtonian mechanics or general relativity, these laws are precisely defined. In 
many other cases, there are common behaviors including open parameters, for example Arrhenius laws for 
the reaction kinetics. Finally, in many cases the laws are largely phenomenological in nature. However, 
common to all these scenarios is that certain definitive statements about the behavior of the system of 
interest can be made at a different level of certainty. For example, when exploring temperature dependence 
of heat capacity in unknown material, some general assumptions can be made regarding the possible values 
of heat capacity (non-negative, limiting values) and its behavior close to 0K. If it is known (for example, 
from structural data) that the material has a phase transition at certain temperature, then the likely behavior 
of heat capacity includes a peak, with the exact shape determined by material purity and order of the phase 
transition. Note that while general, these statements provide a very well-defined structure for the possible 
behavior of the system, - more constrictive and detailed than simple GP assumption of specific correlations. 
Comparatively if we use purely GP methods for exploring heat capacity, none of these behaviors are 
considered. The simple GP/BO methods are purely data driven. 
 
However, the nature of Bayesian methods is such that this information can be easily factored in. In 
the mathematical formalism of Section 3, the GP process was set as the function with zero mean and 
correlations defined by the kernel (see Eq 3). However, the prior mean function can be non-zero and in fact 
represent the physical behaviors of interest. Interestingly, the vast majority of the reviews and books on 
Bayesian methods focus the discussion on kernel structure analysis, while deferring the mean function to 
the domain areas.74 However, it is this flexibility of the GP that allows physical knowledge incorporated in 
the model. 
 
To incorporate our prior knowledge into GP/BO, we substitute a prior mean function m in Eq 3 
with a probabilistic model of expected system behavior whose parameters are inferred together with the 
kernel parameters. Then, the posterior mean in Eq 5 becomes 
𝜇𝜽𝒊𝝓𝒊
post = 𝑚(𝑋∗|𝜙𝑖) + 𝐾(𝑋∗, 𝑋|𝜃𝑖)𝐾(𝑋, 𝑋|𝜃𝑖)
−1(𝑦−𝑚(𝑋|𝜙𝑖))  
(Eq 12) 

30 
 
with the rest of the GP equations unchanged. The 𝜙𝑖 is a single posterior sample with learned parameters 
of the probabilistic model m. Hence, the uncertainty about model parameters is now automatically 
considered during the active learning and Bayesian optimization. This results in a semi-parametric form of 
the Bayesian optimization and active learning algorithms allowing for the ‘physics-informed’ decisions 
about which points to measure next. The incorporated probabilistic model doesn’t have to be precise, but it 
should capture general or partial trend in data. Note that in a sense structured GP can be interpreted as a 
“hybrid” of the Bayesian Inference in section 5 and the simple GP process in section 4, inheriting the 
strength of both approaches and avoiding their shortcomings as will be discussed below. 
 
In Figure 9 we showed an example of modelling a phase transition behavior using a vanilla GP, the 
structured GP with correct model of physical behavior, and the structured GP with a partially correct model 
of physical behavior. Clearly, injecting even a partial knowledge about the system significantly improves 
the GP prediction. 
 
 
Figure 9. Predictions of vanilla GP (a), structured GP with a correct model of physical behavior (b), and 
structural GP with a partially correct model of physical behavior (c) to a dataset with a phase-transition-
like behavior. In (b), we used a piecewise function with power law behavior before and after the phase 
transition, with normal priors over the power law coefficients and uniform prior on the position of the 
transition. In (c), we used a piecewise function with linear behavior before and after the phase transition 
point, with normal priors over the slopes, and uniform prior over the position of the transition. Note that 
even partial knowledge of salient features of true function significantly accelerates the discovery process. 
 
 
The structured GP can be used for hypothesis learning in automated experiments. The hypothesis 
learning is based on the idea that in active learning, the correct model of the system’s behavior leads to the 
faster decrease in the overall uncertainty about the system under study. Specifically, in the hypothesis 
learning setup, several competing (probabilistic) models of expected system’s behavior are wrapped into 
structured GPs, and a basic reinforcement learning policy (e.g., epsilon-greedy) is used to select a correct 
one based on the collected ‘rewards'.  

31 
 
 
Recently, we demonstrated an application of the hypothesis learning to the ferroelectric domain 
switching in PFM. In these experiments, the material is initially switched to a single domain state via 
scanning with biased tip. Subsequently, the bias pulse of a certain length and amplitude are applied to a 
selected location and resulting polarization pattern is imaged. Depending on the pulse parameters, the 
oppositely polarized domain can form. The resultant image can be analyzed to yield the domain size (for 
round domains). The dependence of the domain size as a function of pulse amplitude and length constitute 
the domain growth law. 
 
Historically, the bias- and amplitude dependence of domain size were explored via direct grid 
measurements, where a series of pulses with varying length and amplitude were applied to the surface, 
domain sizes were analyzed, and subsequent dependence of R(V,τ) was analyzed.93, 94 At the same time, a 
number of models for R(V,τ) corresponding to different limiting cases of switching were proposed. Here, 
Molotskii,95, 96 Kalinin,97 and Morozovska98, 99 developed the thermodynamic theory of domain switching 
for different boundary conditions on the surface. In this thermodynamic limit, the size of the domain is 
independent on time and is determined solely by materials and surface properties and bias magnitude. At 
the same time, the thermodynamic theory has elucidated the critical role that surface screening plays in 
domain size evolution. This observation combined with the known presence of slow charge migration on 
oxide surfaces in ambient conditions100-102 suggest that domain growth kinetics can be controlled by the 
diffusion of the screening charges, as was convincingly demonstrated by Yudin.103 In this approximation, 
domain size will be determined by the interplay of electrochemical charge generation at the tip-surface 
junction and lateral diffusion and electromigration of screening charge in the tip field. Finally, the third 
possibility is the kinetic model in which the domain growth kinetics is controlled by the pinning of the 
domain wall in the random impurity potential, as explored in depth by Paruch.94, 104, 105 Correspondingly, 
these models yield the limiting cases for the domain growth dynamics in automated PFM experiment. For 
all scenarios, the alternative simplified forms of the domain growth kinetics are available.  
 

32 
 
 
 
Figure 10. Hypothesis learning automated band excitation piezoresponse force microscopy. (a) a schematic 
showing the integrated system for hypothesis learning automated BEPFM; (b) hypothesis-learning-based 
automated BEPFM workflow; (c-e) Hypothesis learning BEPFM results of a BaTiO3 (BTO) thin film, (c), 
model rewards during the hypotheses learning after the initial 5-step warm-up phase during which all 
models were evaluated at each step. Model III gained a much larger reward than other models, and its 
reward gradually increased at the latter part of the experiment; (d) model selection in hypotheses-learning, 
in which model III was selected more often than other models. (e) experimental results of domain size as a 
function of writing parameters; (f-g) Predictions by all models on the final set of discovered parameters 
after the competition of the experiment, prediction (top row) and corresponding uncertainties (bottom row) 
by four different models, respectively. Adapted with permission under a Creative Commons Attribution 4.0 
International (CC BY 4.0) from Ref[106], Copyright 2022 ArXiv. 
 

33 
 
 
The hypothesis learning based automated experiment is illustrated in Figure 10.106 Here, the 
microscope images the selected region of the sample surface and polarizes it into the single-domain state 
by scanning with the biased tip. With this, the tip is positioned at the center of the image and the bias pulse 
of opposite polarity with a certain magnitude and duration is applied. After the application of the pulse, the 
surface is rescanned, and the size of the formed domain is determined. Based on the measured domain size, 
the parameters for the next pulse are selected and the process is repeated in a fully automated manner.  
 
Initially, 5 steps are performed to yield the initial data for the algorithm. With this in hand, the 
hypothesis learning algorithm is activated and the evolution of the rewards for different models as a function 
of experimental step is shown in Figure 10 (c). Here, models 1 and 2 are thermodynamic for two limiting 
cases of thin and thick domain wall, and do not have time dependence of the domain size. Model 4 is the 
charge-injection limited model, which consistently gives better agreement with the experiment. However,  
Model 3 based on the domain wall pinning process yields best predictability. The experimental flow in 
Figure 10 (d) illustrates how the preferred model is discovered during the experiment. The resultant 
sampling of the two-dimensional (V, τ) space is shown in Figure 10 (e). Note the preferential sampling 
close to the edges of the defined parameter space.  
 
Finally, the output of the hypothesis learning experiment is the chosen model and its parameters, 
i.e., physical law that describe the domain growth in ferroelectric. Here, it is discovered in a fully automated 
fashion. Notably, the hypothesis learning also allows establishing how the alternative models would 
describe the data and generate the associated uncertainties. However, it is important to note that the 
discovery path depends on the chosen reward and model selection during the experiment. 
 
8. 
Some general considerations  
 
To summarize, here we discuss the general framework for the application of the Bayesian active 
learning methods in scanning probe microscopy, using the example of Piezoresponse Force Microscopy. 
We pose that any automated experiment workflow requires defining the prior knowledge, the data available 
during the experiment, and the reward defining the experiment goal. We define the direct and inverse 
automated experiment tasks, namely the sampling of the a priori known objects in the image plane vs. 
discovery of the microstructural elements that possess the behaviors of interest. We illustrate the basic 
principle and formalism behind the simple Gaussian Process models, and illustrate their application for 
image reconstruction (i.e., sampling sequence of the image or spectral space is predetermined) and in 
automated experiment. In the latter case, the results of the prior experiment are used to select the locations 
for the next one. 
 
We further illustrate that simple GP algorithms as applied to imaging or spectral imaging (with 
defined scalar parameter of interest) offer only marginal improvement compared to the grid sampling 

34 
 
methods, with the modest gains in sampling efficiency but greatly increased requirements for compute and 
drift correction. The reason for this is that the spatially-complex data characteristic for physical imaging 
cannot be well-represented via the kernel function, and discovery of the details at a certain length scale 
tends to erase details on a different length scales. These behaviors can be intuitively understood on the full 
ground truth data, assuming that kernel is roughly equivalent to the correlation function.  
 
Conclusions 
 
Comparatively, the Bayesian methods offer very significant advantages when incorporated as a part 
of structure-property discovery framework. In this, rather than learning the unknown black box function 
(e.g. image via sequence of pixel by pixel measurements), the automated experiment aims to reconstruct 
the structure property relationships, e.g. relationship between local structure and local spectra. Here, the 
full image is available to the algorithm as a prior data. This approach is realized via deep kernel learning, 
combining the expressive power of deep convolutional networks and flexibility of GP. This approach allows 
effective reconstruction at ~1% of the imaging budget. 
 
We further discuss the use of Bayesian methods for functional fits, allowing to incorporate the prior 
information in the form of model selection and prior distribution of model parameters. While more 
computationally intensive then classical least square fits, this Bayesian inference approach allows 
significant flexibility for data analysis and allows to introduce the prior knowledge on system behavior and 
materials properties in principled and reproducible way. We also note that the characteristic aspect of 
Bayesian methods – namely reliance on priors – that has long been perceived to be its weakness from 
statistical point of view, in fact make it exceptionally powerful from the physics domain perspective. 
 
Finally, we discuss the structured Gaussian Processes and hypothesis learning as strategies for 
active experiment that combine the prior physical knowledge of the physical model and flexibility of the 
pure data-driven Gaussian Processes and demonstrate the fully automated PFM experiment discovering the 
correct physics behind the domain growth in ferroelectric materials. 
 
While this review is centered around a single scanning probe microscopy method – Piezoresponse 
Force Microscopy – these principles, strategies, and codes can be directly extended to other imaging 
methods that allow for structural, functional, and spectroscopic imaging, and combinations of physical 
methods. For example, the scanning tunneling spectroscopy in scanning tunneling microscopy or force 
distance curve measurements in conventional atomic force microscopy will follow the same logic. Similar 
cases will apply to other scanning probe techniques, for example electron energy loss spectroscopy in 
scanning transmission electron microscopy or optical and mass-spectrometry based chemical imaging. 
Finally, the same approach will apply for the combination of different techniques, e.g., SPM-scanning 

35 
 
electron microscopy, optical microscopy and nanoindentation, or X-ray based local diffraction 
measurements and SPM or optical imaging.  
 
Finally, we note that implementation of the automated experiments workflows requires three well 
defined components. One is the engineering controls, allowing the ML algorithms to guide experimental 
pattern. The second is the ML algorithms that define the experimental path, either in a purely data-driven 
fashion (GP) or utilizing prior experimental (DKL) or physical (structured GP, hypothesis learning) 
knowledge. However, the third and key component is the reward structure, or the goal of experiment – 
either discovery of specific behaviors, general curiosity learning, or some combination of exploration and 
exploitation, and reflected in the a priori defined features of interest in multidimensional data. With these 
three components explicitly defined, the instantiation of automated experiments in SPM, STEM, optical, 
focused X-Ray and other physical and chemical imaging methods becomes straightforward and is ushering 
in an era of scientific discovery.  
 
Acknowledgements: 
The conceptualization of the review and the writing of introduction, section 1, 2, 4 was supported by the 
center for 3D Ferroelectric Microelectronics (3DFeM), an Energy Frontier Research Center funded by the 
U.S. Department of Energy (DOE), Office of Science, Basic Energy Sciences under Award Number DE-
SC0021118. The writing of section 3, 5, and 7 was supported by the Center for Nanophase Materials 
Sciences (CNMS), which is a U.S. Department of Energy, Office of Science User Facility at Oak Ridge 
National Laboratory. The scanning probe work with model selection was sponsored by the U.S. Department 
of Energy (DOE), Office of Basic Energy Sciences, Division of Materials Sciences and Engineering. 
 
Vocabulary: 
Active learning: An approach where a machine learning model interacts with the data generation process 
updating its knowledge about the system after each new measurement. Experimental pathways (such as 
selecting the next measurement locations) are automatically adjusted based on this evolving knowledge. 
Gaussian process: A method for reconstructing an unknown (“black-box”) function with quantified 
uncertainty over a low-dimensional parameter space from sparse measurements. 
Deep kernel learning: A hybrid of deep neural network and Gaussian process that establishes a correlative 
relationship between observed structural features and functional property of interest. 
Bayesian inference: A method for updating probability distributions over parameters of a physical model 
as more information becomes available. 

36 
 
Hypothesis learning: An active learning method for reconstructing the overall data distribution within a 
small number of measurements and simultaneously learning a correct model of the system’s behavior from 
the list of possible probabilistic models (hypotheses). 
 
Methods: 
The codes for applying the described tools to experimental data together with the examples are 
available without restrictions via GitHub: 
- 
Basic GP and BO: https://github.com/ziatdinovmax/GPim  
- 
Deep kernel learning, structured GP, hypothesis learning: https://github.com/ziatdinovmax/gpax 
 
Notes: 
The authors declare no competing financial interest. 
 
Associated Content: 
A pre-print version of this work is available at ArXiv.107  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
References 
1. 
Gerber, C.; Lang, H. P., How the doors to the nanoworld were opened. Nat. Nanotechnol. 2006, 
1 (1), 3-5. 
2. 
Garcia, R.; Perez, R., Dynamic atomic force microscopy methods. Surf. Sci. Rep. 2002, 47 (6-8), 
197-301. 
3. 
Giridharagopal, R.;  Shao, G. Z.;  Groves, C.; Ginger, D. S., New SPM techniques for analyzing OPV 
materials. Materials Today 2010, 13 (9), 50-56. 
4. 
Binnig, G.;  Quate, C. F.; Gerber, C., ATOMIC FORCE MICROSCOPE. Phys. Rev. Lett. 1986, 56 (9), 
930-933. 

37 
 
5. 
Tanimoto, M.; Vatel, O., Kelvin probe force microscopy for characterization of semiconductor 
devices and processes. Journal of Vacuum Science & Technology B 1996, 14 (2), 1547-1551. 
6. 
Nonnenmacher, M.;  Oboyle, M. P.; Wickramasinghe, H. K., KELVIN PROBE FORCE MICROSCOPY. 
Applied Physics Letters 1991, 58 (25), 2921-2923. 
7. 
Martin, Y.; Wickramasinghe, H. K., MAGNETIC IMAGING BY FORCE MICROSCOPY WITH 1000-A 
RESOLUTION. Applied Physics Letters 1987, 50 (20), 1455-1457. 
8. 
Grutter, P.;  Liu, Y.;  LeBlanc, P.; Durig, U., Magnetic dissipation force microscopy. Applied 
Physics Letters 1997, 71 (2), 279-281. 
9. 
Rabe, U.;  Kopycinska, M.;  Hirsekorn, S.;  Saldana, J. M.;  Schneider, G. A.; Arnold, W., High-
resolution characterization of piezoelectric ceramics by ultrasonic scanning force microscopy 
techniques. Journal of Physics D-Applied Physics 2002, 35 (20), 2621-2635. 
10. 
Rabe, U.; Arnold, W., ACOUSTIC MICROSCOPY BY ATOMIC-FORCE MICROSCOPY. Applied Physics 
Letters 1994, 64 (12), 1493-1495. 
11. 
Kalinin, S. V.; Balke, N., Local Electrochemical Functionality in Energy Storage Materials and 
Devices by Scanning Probe Microscopies: Status and Perspectives. Adv. Mater. 2010, 22 (35), E193-E209. 
12. 
Alliata, D.;  Kotz, R.;  Novak, P.; Siegenthaler, H., Electrochemical SPM investigation of the solid 
electrolyte interphase film formed on HOPG electrodes. Electrochemistry Communications 2000, 2 (6), 
436-440. 
13. 
Roushan, P.;  Seo, J.;  Parker, C. V.;  Hor, Y. S.;  Hsieh, D.;  Qian, D.;  Richardella, A.;  Hasan, M. Z.;  
Cava, R. J.; Yazdani, A., Topological surface states protected from backscattering by chiral spin texture. 
Nature 2009, 460 (7259), 1106-U64. 
14. 
Moore, R. G.;  Zhang, J. D.;  Kalinin, S. V.;  Ismail;  Baddorf, A. P.;  Jin, R.;  Mandrus, D. G.; 
Plummer, E. W., Surface dynamics of the layered ruthenate Ca1.9Sr0.1RuO4. Physica Status Solidi B-
Basic Research 2004, 241 (10), 2363-2366. 
15. 
Schofield, S. R.;  Curson, N. J.;  Simmons, M. Y.;  Ruess, F. J.;  Hallam, T.;  Oberbeck, L.; Clark, R. 
G., Atomically precise placement of single dopants in Si. Phys. Rev. Lett. 2003, 91 (13). 
16. 
Garcia, R.;  Martinez, R. V.; Martinez, J., Nano-chemistry and scanning probe nanolithographies. 
Chem. Soc. Rev. 2006, 35 (1), 29-38. 
17. 
Kostecki, R.; McLarnon, F., Nanometer-scale electrochemical lithography on the spinel oxide 
LiMn2O4. Applied Physics Letters 2000, 76 (18), 2535-2537. 
18. 
Gruverman, A.;  Auciello, O.; Tokumoto, H., Imaging and control of domain structures in 
ferroelectric thin films via scanning force microscopy. Annu. Rev. Mater. Sci. 1998, 28, 101-123. 
19. 
Bonnell, D. A.;  Kalinin, S. V.;  Kholkin, A. L.; Gruverman, A., Piezoresponse Force Microscopy: A 
Window into Electromechanical Behavior at the Nanoscale. Mrs Bulletin 2009, 34 (9), 648-657. 
20. 
Hla, S. W., Atom-by-atom assembly. Reports on Progress in Physics 2014, 77 (5). 
21. 
Eigler, D. M.;  Lutz, C. P.; Rudge, W. E., AN ATOMIC SWITCH REALIZED WITH THE SCANNING 
TUNNELING MICROSCOPE. Nature 1991, 352 (6336), 600-603. 
22. 
Belianinov, A.;  Vasudevan, R.;  Strelcov, E.;  Steed, C.;  Yang, S. M.;  Tselev, A.;  Jesse, S.;  
Biegalski, M.;  Shipman, G.;  Symons, C.;  Borisevich, A.;  Archibald, R.; Kalinin, S., Big data and deep data 
in scanning and electron microscopies: deriving functionality from multidimensional data sets. Adv. 
Struct. Chem. Imag. 2015, 1. 
23. 
Asenjo, A.;  Gomezrodriguez, J. M.; Baro, A. M., CURRENT IMAGING TUNNELING SPECTROSCOPY 
OF METALLIC DEPOSITS ON SILICON. Ultramicroscopy 1992, 42, 933-939. 
24. 
Gad, M.;  Itoh, A.; Ikai, A., Mapping cell wall polysaccharides of living microbial cells using atomic 
force microscopy. Cell Biology International 1997, 21 (11), 697-706. 
25. 
Vasudevan, R. K.;  Jesse, S.;  Kim, Y.;  Kumar, A.; Kalinin, S. V., Spectroscopic imaging in 
piezoresponse force microscopy: New opportunities for studying polarization dynamics in ferroelectrics 
and multiferroics. MRS Commun. 2012, 2 (3), 61-73. 

38 
 
26. 
Kalinin, S. V.;  Karapetian, E.; Kachanov, M., Nanoelectromechanics of piezoresponse force 
microscopy. Phys. Rev. B 2004, 70 (18), 184101. 
27. 
Karapetian, E.;  Kachanov, M.; Kalinin, S. V., Nanoelectromechanics of piezoelectric indentation 
and applications to scanning probe microscopies of ferroelectric materials. Philosophical Magazine 
2005, 85 (10), 1017-1051. 
28. 
Butt, H. J.;  Cappella, B.; Kappl, M., Force measurements with the atomic force microscope: 
Technique, interpretation and applications. Surf. Sci. Rep. 2005, 59 (1-6), 1-152. 
29. 
Jesse, S.;  Kalinin, S. V.;  Proksch, R.;  Baddorf, A. P.; Rodriguez, B. J., The band excitation method 
in scanning probe microscopy for rapid mapping of energy dissipation on the nanoscale. 
Nanotechnology 2007, 18 (43), 435503. 
30. 
Jesse, S.; Kalinin, S. V., Principal component and spatial correlation analysis of spectroscopic-
imaging data in scanning probe microscopy. Nanotechnology 2009, 20 (8), 085714. 
31. 
Nikiforov, M. P.;  Reukov, V. V.;  Thompson, G. L.;  Vertegel, A. A.;  Guo, S.;  Kalinin, S. V.; Jesse, 
S., Functional recognition imaging using artificial neural networks: applications to rapid cellular 
identification via broadband electromechanical response. Nanotechnology 2009, 20 (40), 405708. 
32. 
Li, X.;  Collins, L.;  Miyazawa, K.;  Fukuma, T.;  Jesse, S.; Kalinin, S. V., High-veracity functional 
imaging in scanning probe microscopy via Graph-Bootstrapping. Nature Communications 2018, 9. 
33. 
Rashidi, M.; Wolkow, R. A., Autonomous scanning probe microscopy in situ tip conditioning 
through machine learning. ACS nano 2018, 12 (6), 5185-5189. 
34. 
Sotres, J.;  Boyd, H.; Gonzalez-Martinez, J. F., Enabling autonomous scanning probe microscopy 
imaging of single molecules with deep learning. Nanoscale 2021, 13 (20), 9193-9203. 
35. 
Huang, B.;  Li, Z.; Li, J., An artificial intelligence atomic force microscope enabled by machine 
learning. Nanoscale 2018, 10 (45), 21320-21326. 
36. 
Alldritt, B.;  Urtev, F.;  Oinonen, N.;  Aapro, M.;  Kannala, J.;  Liljeroth, P.; Foster, A. S., 
Automated tip functionalization via machine learning in scanning probe microscopy. Computer Physics 
Communications 2022, 273, 108258. 
37. 
Krull, A.;  Hirsch, P.;  Rother, C.;  Schiffrin, A.; Krull, C., Artificial-intelligence-driven scanning 
probe microscopy. Communications Physics 2020, 3 (1), 1-8. 
38. 
Kalinin, S. V.;  Kelley, K.;  Vasudevan, R. K.; Ziatdinov, M., Toward decoding the relationship 
between domain structure and functionality in ferroelectrics via hidden latent variables. ACS Applied 
Materials & Interfaces 2021, 13 (1), 1693-1703. 
39. 
Ziatdinov, M.;  Fujii, S.;  Kiguchi, M.;  Enoki, T.;  Jesse, S.; Kalinin, S. V., Data mining graphene: 
correlative analysis of structure and electronic degrees of freedom in graphenic monolayers with 
defects. Nanotechnology 2016, 27 (49). 
40. 
Ovchinnikov, O. S.;  Jesse, S.; Kalinin, S. V., Adaptive probe trajectory scanning probe microscopy 
for multiresolution measurements of interface geometry. Nanotechnology 2009, 20 (25). 
41. 
Mokaberi, B.; Requicha, A. A., Drift compensation for automatic nanomanipulation with 
scanning probe microscopes. IEEE Transactions on Automation Science and Engineering 2006, 3 (3), 199-
207. 
42. 
Gao, D.;  Zhang, C.; Schwartzentruber, T. E., Particle simulations of planetary probe flows 
employing automated mesh refinement. Journal of Spacecraft and Rockets 2011, 48 (3), 397-405. 
43. 
Kalinin, S. V.;  Ziatdinov, M.;  Hinkle, J.;  Jesse, S.;  Ghosh, A.;  Kelley, K. P.;  Lupini, A. R.;  
Sumpter, B. G.; Vasudevan, R. K., Automated and Autonomous Experiments in Electron and Scanning 
Probe Microscopy. ACS nano 2021, 15 (8), 12604-12627. 
44. 
Vasudevan, R. K.;  Kelley, K. P.;  Hinkle, J.;  Funakubo, H.;  Jesse, S.;  Kalinin, S. V.; Ziatdinov, M., 
Autonomous Experiments in Scanning Probe Microscopy and Spectroscopy: Choosing Where to Explore 
Polarization Dynamics in Ferroelectrics. ACS nano 2021, 15 (7), 11253-11262. 

39 
 
45. 
Azuri, I.;  Rosenhek-Goldian, I.;  Regev-Rudzki, N.;  Fantner, G.; Cohen, S. R., The role of 
convolutional neural networks in scanning probe microscopy: a review. Beilstein journal of 
nanotechnology 2021, 12 (1), 878-901. 
46. 
Vasudevan, R. K.;  Kelley, K. P.;  Eliseev, E.;  Jesse, S.;  Funakubo, H.;  Morozovska, A.; Kalinin, S. 
V., Bayesian inference in band excitation scanning probe microscopy for optimal dynamic model 
selection in imaging. J. Appl. Phys. 2020, 128 (5), 054105. 
47. 
Kalinin, S.;  Rodriguez, B.; Kholkin, A., Piezoresponse force microscopy and spectroscopy. 
Encyclopedia of Nanotechnology; Bhushan, B., Ed.; Springer, Netherlands Dordrecht, 2012; pp 2117-
2125. 
48. 
Liu, Y.;  Kelley, K. P.;  Vasudevan, R. K.;  Funakubo, H.;  Ziatdinov, M. A.; Kalinin, S. V., 
Experimental discovery of structure–property relationships in ferroelectric materials via active learning. 
Nature Machine Intelligence 2022, 4, 341-350. 
49. 
Shilo, D.;  Ravichandran, G.; Bhattacharya, K., Investigation of twin-wall structure at the 
nanometre scale using atomic force microscopy. Nature Materials 2004, 3 (7), 453-457. 
50. 
Eng, L. M.; Guntherodt, H. J., Scanning force microscopy and near-field scanning optical 
microscopy of ferroelectric and ferroelastic domain walls. Ferroelectrics 2000, 236 (1-4), 35-+. 
51. 
Kalinin, S. V.;  Gruverman, A.; Bonnell, D. A., Quantitative analysis of nanoscale switching in 
SrBi2Ta2O9 thin films by piezoresponse force microscopy. Applied Physics Letters 2004, 85 (5), 795-797. 
52. 
Bdikin, I. K.;  Shvartsman, V. V.; Kholkin, A. L., Nanoscale domains and local piezoelectric 
hysteresis in Pb(Zn1/3Nb2/3)O-3-4.5%PbTIO3 single crystals. Applied Physics Letters 2003, 83 (20), 4232-
4234. 
53. 
Eng, L. M.;  Grafstrom, S.;  Loppacher, C.;  Schlaphof, F.;  Trogisch, S.;  Roelofs, A.; Waser, R., 
Three-dimensional electric field probing of ferroelectrics on the nanometer scale using scanning force 
microscopy. In Advances in Solid State Physics 41, Kramer, B., Ed. Springer-Verlag Berlin: Berlin, 2001; 
Vol. 41, pp 287-298. 
54. 
Jesse, S.;  Lee, H. N.; Kalinin, S. V., Quantitative mapping of switching behavior in piezoresponse 
force microscopy. Review of Scientific Instruments 2006, 77 (7), 073702. 
55. 
Jesse, S.;  Maksymovych, P.; Kalinin, S. V., Rapid multidimensional data acquisition in scanning 
probe microscopy applied to local polarization dynamics and voltage dependent contact mechanics. 
Applied Physics Letters 2008, 93 (11), 112903. 
56. 
Kalinin, S. V.;  Strelcov, E.;  Belianinov, A.;  Somnath, S.;  Vasudevan, R. K.;  Lingerfelt, E. J.;  
Archibald, R. K.;  Chen, C. M.;  Proksch, R.;  Laanait, N.; Jesse, S., Big, Deep, and Smart Data in Scanning 
Probe Microscopy. Acs Nano 2016, 10 (10), 9068-9086. 
57. 
Kannan, R.;  Ievlev, A. V.;  Laanait, N.;  Ziatdinov, M. A.;  Vasudevan, R. K.;  Jesse, S.; Kalinin, S. V., 
Deep data analysis via physically constrained linear unmixing: universal framework, domain examples, 
and a community-wide platform. Adv. Struct. Chem. Imag. 2018, 4, 20. 
58. 
Li, X.;  Dyck, O.;  Kalinin, S. V.; Jesse, S., Compressed Sensing of Scanning Transmission Electron 
Microscopy (STEM) With Nonrectangular Scans. Microsc. microanal. 2018, 24 (6), 623-633. 
59. 
Stevens, A.;  Yang, H.;  Kovarik, L.;  Yuan, X.;  Ramasse, Q.;  Abellan, P.;  Pu, Y.;  Carin, L.; 
Browning, N. D., Compressive Sensing in Microscopy: a Tutorial. Microscopy and Microanalysis 2016, 22 
(S3), 2084-2085. 
60. 
Harnagea, C.;  Alexe, M.;  Hesse, D.; Pignolet, A., Contact resonances in voltage-modulated force 
microscopy. Applied Physics Letters 2003, 83 (2), 338-340. 
61. 
Huey, B. D.;  Ramanujan, C.;  Bobji, M.;  Blendell, J.;  White, G.;  Szoszkiewicz, R.; Kulik, A., The 
importance of distributed loading and cantilever angle in piezo-force microscopy. Journal of 
Electroceramics 2004, 13 (1-3), 287-291. 
62. 
Jesse, S.;  Baddorf, A. P.; Kalinin, S. V., Dynamic behaviour in piezoresponse force microscopy. 
Nanotechnology 2006, 17 (6), 1615-1628. 

40 
 
63. 
Kelley, K. P.;  Ren, Y.;  Dasgupta, A.;  Kavle, P.;  Jesse, S.;  Vasudevan, R. K.;  Cao, Y.;  Martin, L. 
W.; Kalinin, S. V., Probing Metastable Domain Dynamics via Automated Experimentation in 
Piezoresponse Force Microscopy. ACS nano 2021, 15 (9), 15096-15103. 
64. 
Liu, Y.;  Proksch, R.;  Wong, C. Y.;  Ziatdinov, M.; Kalinin, S. V., Disentangling Ferroelectric Wall 
Dynamics and Identification of Pinning Mechanisms via Deep Learning. Adv. Mater. 2021, 33 (43), 
2103680. 
65. 
Amodei, D.;  Olah, C.;  Steinhardt, J.;  Christiano, P.;  Schulman, J.; Mané, D., Concrete problems 
in AI safety. 2016, 1606.06565. arXiv ( Artificial Intelligence). https://arxiv.org/abs/1606.06565 (accessed 
08-17-2022). 
66. 
Nguyen, A.;  Yosinski, J.; Clune, J., Deep neural networks are easily fooled: High confidence 
predictions for unrecognizable images. Proceedings of the IEEE conference on computer vision and 
pattern recognition 2015, 427-436. 
67. 
Gulrajani, I.; Lopez-Paz, D., In search of lost domain generalization. 2020, 2007.01434. arXiv 
(Machine Learning). https://arxiv.org/abs/2007.01434 (accessed 08-17-2022). 
68. 
Beery, S.;  Van Horn, G.; Perona, P., Recognition in terra incognita. Proceedings of the European 
conference on computer vision (ECCV) 2018, 456-473. 
69. 
Nagarajan, V.;  Andreassen, A.; Neyshabur, B., Understanding the failure modes of out-of-
distribution generalization. 2020, 2010.15775. arXiv (Machine Learning). 
https://arxiv.org/abs/2010.15775 (accessed 08-17-2022). 
70. 
Arjovsky, M.;  Bottou, L.;  Gulrajani, I.; Lopez-Paz, D., Invariant risk minimization. 2019, 
1907.02893. arXiv (Machine Learning). https://arxiv.org/abs/1907.02893 (accessed 08-17-2022). 
71. 
Zbontar, J.;  Jing, L.;  Misra, I.;  LeCun, Y.; Deny, S., Barlow twins: Self-supervised learning via 
redundancy reduction. International Conference on Machine Learning 2021, 12310-12320. 
72. 
Lakshminarayanan, B.;  Pritzel, A.; Blundell, C., Simple and scalable predictive uncertainty 
estimation using deep ensembles. Advances in neural information processing systems 2017, 30. 
73. 
Ghosh, A.;  Sumpter, B. G.;  Dyck, O.;  Kalinin, S. V.; Ziatdinov, M., Ensemble learning-iterative 
training machine learning for uncertainty quantification and automated experiment in atom-resolved 
microscopy. npj Computational Materials 2021, 7 (1), 100. 
74. 
Garnett, R., Bayesian Optimization, https://bayesoptbook.com/. Cambridge University Press: 
2022. 
75. 
Lambert, B., A Student’s Guide to Bayesian Statistics. SAGE Publications Ltd; 1 edition: 2018. 
76. 
Martin, O., Bayesian Analysis with Python: Introduction to statistical modeling and probabilistic 
programming using PyMC3 and ArviZ, 2nd Edition. Packt Publishing: 2018. 
77. 
Rasmussen, C. E.; Williams, C. K. I., Gaussian Processes for Machine Learning (Adaptive 
Computation and Machine Learning). The MIT Press: 2005. 
78. 
Bingham, E.;  Chen, J. P.;  Jankowiak, M.;  Obermeyer, F.;  Pradhan, N.;  Karaletsos, T.;  Singh, R.;  
Szerlip, P.;  Horsfall, P.; Goodman, N. D., Pyro: Deep universal probabilistic programming. The Journal of 
Machine Learning Research 2019, 20 (1), 973-978. 
79. 
Phan, D.;  Pradhan, N.; Jankowiak, M., Composable Effects for Flexible and Accelerated 
Probabilistic Programming in NumPyro. 2019, 1912.11554 . arXiv (Machine Learning). 
https://arxiv.org/abs/1912.11554 (accessed 08-17-2022). 
80. 
Mockus, J.;  Tiesis, V.; Zilinskas, A. J. T. g. o., The application of Bayesian methods for seeking the 
extremum. 1978, 2 (117-129), 2. 
81. 
Hennig, P.; Schuler, C. J. J. J. o. M. L. R., Entropy Search for Information-Efficient Global 
Optimization. The Journal of Machine Learning Research 2012, 13 (6), 1809–1837. 
82. 
Frazier, P. I.;  Powell, W. B.; Dayanik, S., A Knowledge-Gradient Policy for Sequential Information 
Collection. SIAM Journal on Control and Optimization 2008, 47 (5), 2410-2439. 

41 
 
83. 
Frazier, P. I., A tutorial on Bayesian optimization. 2018, 1807.02811. arXiv (Machine Learning). 
https://arxiv.org/abs/1807.02811 (accessed 08-17-2022). 
84. 
Shahriari, B.;  Swersky, K.;  Wang, Z.;  Adams, R. P.; Freitas, N. d., Taking the Human Out of the 
Loop: A Review of Bayesian Optimization. Proceedings of the IEEE 2016, 104 (1), 148-175. 
85. 
Kelley, K. P.;  Ziatdinov, M.;  Collins, L.;  Susner, M. A.;  Vasudevan, R. K.;  Balke, N.;  Kalinin, S. V.; 
Jesse, S., Fast Scanning Probe Microscopy via Machine Learning: Non‐Rectangular Scans with 
Compressed Sensing and Gaussian Process Optimization. Small 2020, 16 (37), 2002878. 
86. 
Creange, N.;  Dyck, O.;  Vasudevan, R. K.;  Ziatdinov, M.; Kalinin, S. V., Towards automating 
structural discovery in scanning transmission electron microscopy. Mach. learn.: sci. technol. 2022, 3 (1), 
015024. 
87. 
Moré, J. J., The Levenberg-Marquardt algorithm: implementation and theory. In Numerical 
analysis, Springer: 1978; pp 105-116. 
88. 
Kruschke, J. K.;  Aguinis, H.; Joo, H., The time has come: Bayesian methods for data analysis in 
the organizational sciences. Organizational Research Methods 2012, 15 (4), 722-752. 
89. 
Watanabe, S., A widely applicable Bayesian information criterion. J. Mach. Learn Res. 2013, 14 
(Mar), 867-897. 
90. 
Gelman, A.;  Hwang, J.; Vehtari, A., Understanding predictive information criteria for Bayesian 
models. Statistics and computing 2014, 24 (6), 997-1016. 
91. 
Yao, Y.;  Vehtari, A.;  Simpson, D.; Gelman, A., Using stacking to average Bayesian predictive 
distributions (with discussion). Bayesian Analysis 2018, 13 (3), 917-1007. 
92. 
Nelson, C. T.;  Vasudevan, R. K.;  Zhang, X.;  Ziatdinov, M.;  Eliseev, E. A.;  Takeuchi, I.;  
Morozovska, A. N.; Kalinin, S. V., Exploring physics of ferroelectric domain walls via Bayesian analysis of 
atomically resolved STEM data. Nature Communications 2020, 11 (1), 6361. 
93. 
Rodriguez, B. J.;  Nemanich, R. J.;  Kingon, A.;  Gruverman, A.;  Kalinin, S. V.;  Terabe, K.;  Liu, X. 
Y.; Kitamura, K., Domain growth kinetics in lithium niobate single crystals studied by piezoresponse force 
microscopy. Applied Physics Letters 2005, 86 (1). 
94. 
Tybell, T.;  Paruch, P.;  Giamarchi, T.; Triscone, J. M., Domain wall creep in epitaxial ferroelectric 
Pb(Zr(0.2)Ti(0.8))O(3) thin films. Phys. Rev. Lett. 2002, 89 (9). 
95. 
Molotskii, M.; Winebrand, E., Interactions of an atomic force microscope tip with a reversed 
ferroelectric domain. Phys. Rev. B 2005, 71 (13). 
96. 
Molotskii, M. I.; Shvebelman, M. M., Dynamics of ferroelectric domain formation in an atomic 
force microscope. Philosophical Magazine 2005, 85 (15), 1637-1655. 
97. 
Kalinin, S. V.;  Gruverman, A.;  Rodriguez, B. J.;  Shin, J.;  Baddorf, A. P.;  Karapetian, E.; Kachanov, 
M., Nanoelectromechanics of polarization switching in piezoresponse force microscopy. J. Appl. Phys. 
2005, 97 (7). 
98. 
Morozovska, A. N.;  Eliseev, E. A.; Kalinin, S. V., Domain nucleation and hysteresis loop shape in 
piezoresponse force spectroscopy. Applied Physics Letters 2006, 89 (19). 
99. 
Morozovska, A. N.;  Kalinin, S. V.;  Eliseev, E. A.; Svechnikov, S. V., Local polarization switching in 
piezoresponse force microscopy. Ferroelectrics 2007, 354, 198-207. 
100. 
Kalinin, S. V.;  Shin, J.;  Jesse, S.;  Geohegan, D.;  Baddorf, A. P.;  Lilach, Y.;  Moskovits, M.; 
Kolmakov, A., Electronic transport imaging in a multiwire SnO2 chemical field-effect transistor device. J. 
Appl. Phys. 2005, 98 (4), 044503. 
101. 
Kalinin, S. V.; Bonnell, D. A., Screening phenomena on oxide surfaces and its implications for 
local electrostatic and transport measurements. Nano Letters 2004, 4 (4), 555-560. 
102. 
Dahan, D.;  Molotskii, M.;  Rosenman, G.; Rosenwaks, Y., Ferroelectric domain inversion: The 
role of humidity. Applied Physics Letters 2006, 89 (15), 152902. 
103. 
Yudin, P. V.;  Hrebtov, M. Y.;  Dejneka, A.; McGilly, L. J., Modeling the Motion of Ferroelectric 
Domain Walls with the Classical Stefan Problem. Physical Review Applied 2020, 13 (1), 014006. 

42 
 
104. 
Paruch, P.;  Giamarchi, T.; Triscone, J. M., Domain wall roughness in epitaxial ferroelectric 
PbZr(0.2)Ti(0.8)O(3) thin films. Phys. Rev. Lett. 2005, 94 (19). 
105. 
Paruch, P.;  Giamarchi, T.;  Tybell, T.; Triscone, J. M., Nanoscale studies of domain wall motion in 
epitaxial ferroelectric thin films. J. Appl. Phys. 2006, 100 (5). 
106. 
Liu, Y.;  Morozovska, A.;  Eliseev, E.;  Kelley, K. P.;  Vasudevan, R.;  Ziatdinov, M.; Kalinin, S. V., 
Hypothesis-Driven Automated Experiment in Scanning Probe Microscopy: Exploring the Domain Growth 
Laws in Ferroelectric Materials. 2022, 2202.01089. arXiv (Materials Science). 
https://arxiv.org/abs/2202.01089 (accessed 08-17-2022). 
107.       Ziatdinov, M.; Liu, Y.; Kelley, K.; Vasudevan, R.; Kalinin, S.V., Bayesian Active Learning for 
Scanning Probe Microscopy: from Gaussian Processes to Hypothesis Learning. 2022, 2205.15458. arXiv 
(Materials Science). https://arxiv.org/abs/2205.15458 (accessed 08-17-2022). 
 
 
 
 

43 
 
For Table of Contents Only 
 
 
Machine 
learning 
CPU 
GPU 
Real-time decision 
Real-time signal 
