Toward Sustainable Polymer Design: A Molecular Dynamics-Informed Machine
Learning Approach for Vitrimers
Yiwen Zhenga, Agni K. Biswala, Yaqi Guob, Prakash Thakolkaranb, Yash Kokanea, Vikas Varshneyc, Siddhant
Kumarb, Aniruddh Vashistha,∗
aDepartment of Mechanical Engineering, University of Washington, Seattle, WA, USA
bDepartment of Materials Science and Engineering, Delft University of Technology, Delft, The Netherlands
cMaterials and Manufacturing Directorate, Air Force Research Laboratory, Wright-Patterson Air Force Base, OH, USA
Abstract
Vitrimer is an emerging class of sustainable polymers with self-healing capabilities enabled by dynamic covalent
adaptive networks. However, their limited molecular diversity constrains their property space and potential applica-
tions. Recent development in machine learning (ML) techniques accelerates polymer design by predicting properties
and virtually screening candidates, yet the scarcity of available experimental vitrimer data poses challenges in training
ML models. To address this, we leverage molecular dynamics (MD) data generated by our previous work to train and
benchmark seven ML models covering six feature representations for glass transition temperature (Tg) prediction. By
averaging predicted Tg from different models, the model ensemble approach outperforms individual models, allowing
for accurate and efficient property prediction on unlabeled datasets. Two novel vitrimers are identified and synthe-
sized, exhibiting experimentally validated higher Tg than existing bifunctional transesterification vitrimers, along with
demonstrated healability. This work explores the possibility of using MD data to train ML models in the absence of
sufficient experimental data, enabling the discovery of novel, synthesizable polymer chemistries with superior prop-
erties. The integrated MD-ML approach offers polymer chemists an efficient tool for designing polymers tailored to
diverse applications.
Keywords: Machine learning; Vitrimer; Recyclable polymer; Polymer discovery
1. Introduction
Polymers play a crucial role in a wide array of industries, including coating, microelectronics, automobile, and
aerospace. However, their performance decays over time as molecular bonds break under conditions such as mechan-
ical stress and temperature during utilization. In traditional thermosets and thermoplastics polymers, this damage is
irreversible since the rupture of covalent bonds cannot be reversed. This leads to the formation of cracks and eventual
material failure [1]. As a result, most end-of-life polymer products end up as waste after failure, posing significant
challenges to sustainability. The inability to repair degraded polymers leads to product replacement and increases eco-
nomic costs in plastics manufacturing. In addition, the lack of intrinsic ability to repair molecular damage in polymers
limits the recyclability of used thermoplastics and thermosets.
Since the introduction by Leibler et al. [2, 3, 4, 5], a type of healable polymers called vitrimers have gained signif-
icant attention as a potential solution to the plastic pollution issue. Combining the reprocessability of thermoplastics
and superior mechanical properties of thermosets, vitrimers can potentially reduce plastic production and costs in
polymer recycling. Vitrimers are featured by dynamic covalent adaptive networks (CANs) which enable building
blocks to attach to and detach from each other via bond exchange reactions, which brings healability and recyclability
(Figure 1a). Vitrimers can be classified based on the the types of bond exchange reactions including transesterifica-
tion, disulfide exchange, and imine exchange reactions [4]. However, the thermo-mechanical properties of currently
∗Email: vashisth@uw.edu
Preprint submitted to Elsevier
March 31, 2025
arXiv:2503.20956v1  [cond-mat.mtrl-sci]  26 Mar 2025

available vitrimers are constrained by the limited variety of commercially available molecular building blocks (i.e.,
monomers) used in their synthesis. Therefore, to broaden the applications of vitrimers, it is essential to efficiently
identify the available or synthesizable monomers that constitute vitrimers with desirable properties.
Traditionally, novel polymer discovery has been accomplished in a trial-and-error fashion [6]. For a given set of
polymers, chemists characterize the properties of each one of them by experiments and selected those with desired
properties. Since experimental synthesis of novel polymer chemistries is costly, molecular dynamics (MD) simula-
tions have been favored as an alternative method to characterize polymers. MD is a simulation technique that bridges
quantum mechanics and classical mechanics, and it has been extensively utilized to accelerate the discovery process
[7]. MD simulations have provided valuable insights into how polymer molecular structures influence mechanical
properties [8], glass transition temperature [9], and self-healing performance [10]. Despite these advancements, large-
scale computational screening using MD or other simulation techniques remains computationally expensive even with
the progress in high-performance computing [11]. Consequently, the exploration of polymer design space is typically
constrained and fails to cover the vast design space of molecular compositions.
Recent developments in machine learning (ML) methods have opened a new path to accelerate polymer discovery
by orders of magnitude. ML models are trained using available data to predict polymer properties (labels) from molec-
ular structures (features). The trained models are employed to predict the properties of unlabeled polymers (whose
properties are unknown) and the polymers with promising predicted properties are selected for further validation.
This process is also known as virtual screening, which has been applied to design polymers with various properties
including glass transition temperature (Tg) [12], thermal conductivity [13], bandgap [14], and gas uptake properties
[15]. Generally, there are three considerations when applying machine learning to polymer property prediction:
• Data: High-quality datasets are necessary for training accurate ML models. The largest polymer database
PolyInfo [16] contains ∼18,000 polymers with experimentally measured properties but lack sufficient data in
specific properties. For example, there are only 173 data points of thermal conductivity. As an experimental
database, recently synthesized polymers are also absent in PolyInfo. To address these challenges, high through-
put MD simulations allow for creating a large and consistent dataset to train ML models. Researchers have
established and curated polymer datasets of various properties including glass transition temperature [17], free
volume [18], thermal conductivity, [13] and ionic conductivity [19]. ML models have been trained using these
datasets for virtual screening of polymers and novel insights into structure-property relationships have been
identified.
• Representations: Monomers or polymer repeating units consist of atoms and bonds, which, in the original form,
are not interpretable to ML models. To achieve accurate predictions, it is essential to select an appropriate way to
convert molecular structures into machine-readable numerical feature representations. Molecular descriptors,
which are theoretically derived values incorporating physicochemical information of molecules, serve as a
commonly used representation [20, 21]. Another prevalent representation is molecular fingerprints, which are
vectors with substructure occurrences as entries [22]. Molecular structures can also be described using string
notations such as simplified molecular-input line-entry system (SMILES) [23]. Graph-based representations
have drawn increasing attention due to the inherent graph nature of molecules, where atoms or substructures
serve as nodes and bonds as edges. The selection of the best representation type is typically case-specific and
requires empirical trials.
• ML models: The choice of ML models is partially dependent on the selected representation of polymers. For
example, graph neural networks (GNNs) are specialized for graphs while Transformers are more suitable for
sequence-based input such as SMILES [24, 25]. Molecular descriptors and fingerprints are more universal and
accommodate both shallow and deep ML models such as linear regression, random forest, and feed-forward
neural networks. Similar to representations, the choice of best ML models is also empirical.
Despite the growing applications of ML for polymers, efforts to design vitrimers using ML remain limited. Yan
et al. [26] employed a variational autoencoder (VAE)-based virtual screening approach to identify vitrimers with
desirable glass transition temperature (Tg) and recyclability. In their method, vitrimers were encoded as latent vectors
using a pretrained VAE, while a feedforward neural network (FFNN) predicted Tg from these latent vectors. How-
ever, although the VAE was pretrained on ∼420,000 drug-like molecules, the property predictor was trained on a
2

• LASSO
• RF
• SVR
• XGBoost
• FFNN
• GNN
• Transformer
Predicted Tg
R1
R2
R1
R2
R1
R1
R2
R1
:
...
R2
:
...
8,424 
vitrimers
with
MD Tg
RDKit
Descriptors
• MolWt
• qed
• RingCount
Mol2vec
SMILES
*CC(O)COc1ccc
(C(C)(C)c2ccc
(OCC(O)COC(=O
)CCCCC(=O)O*)
cc2)cc1
Mordred
Descriptors
• RotRatio
• nAromAtom
• nBonds
Graph
Molecular
Fingerprints
Impactful substructures
Impactful descriptors
NumRotatableBonds
VSA_Estate2
fr_ether
a
Representations
Labeled dataset
Ensemble learning
Tg prediction
Interpretability
ZINC15
hypothetical 
vitrimers
Sigma-Aldrich
synthesizable 
vitrimers
b
Unlabeled
datasets
Trained
ensemble 
models
Virtual
screening
Discovered vitrimers
c
Experimental synthesis
Hypothetical
Synthesizable
Figure 1: Overview of this work. (a) Leveraging a previously developed vitrimer dataset, the performance of seven ML models covering six feature
representation types is benchmarked. The ensemble model, which averages predictions from different models, achieves the best performance. We
also provide interpretability into the ML models and identify the most impactful descriptors and substructures. (b) The trained ensemble model is
applied to predict Tg of unlabeled datasets and novel vitrimers are discovered. (c) Two screened vitrimers are selected for experimental synthesis
and characterization, demonstrating high Tg compared with bifunctional transesterification vitrimers present in the literature.
small experimental dataset (389 data points for Tg) manually curated from the literature, resulting in limited predic-
tive accuracy. In our previous work [17], we addressed this limitation by conducting large-scale molecular dynamics
(MD) simulations to calculate the Tg of 8,424 hypothetical vitrimers and calibrating calculated Tg against available
experimental data. This dataset, along with an unlabeled set of ∼1 million hypothetical vitrimers, was used to train
a VAE for the inverse design of vitrimers with targeted Tg. While the generative model successfully learned the dis-
tribution of valid vitrimers and generated novel chemistries, it did not explicitly account for synthesizability, making
the proposed vitrimers difficult to synthesize. In contrast, the virtual screening approach ensures the synthesizability
of designed vitrimers by restricting the search space to a predefined unlabeled dataset consisting of vitrimers derived
from commercially available monomers.
In this work, we introduce an integrated MD-ML virtual screening framework to discover bifunctional transester-
ification vitrimers composed of carboxylic acids and epoxides in an equimolar ratio. Leveraging open source MD-
generated data from our previous study [17], we systematically evaluate the performance of ML models in predicting
vitrimer glass transition temperature (Tg). We benchmark seven ML models (linear regression, random forest, sup-
port vector regression, gradient boosting, feedforward neural network, graph neural network, and Transformer) across
six molecular representations, including molecular fingerprints, RDKit [20] descriptors, Mordred [21] descriptors,
Mol2vec embeddings [27], SMILES, and graphs. Our findings indicate that an ensemble learning approach, which
averages predictions from multiple models, outperforms individual models (Figure 1a). Our analysis of feature impor-
tance further provides interpretability by identifying key factors that influence the Tg of vitrimers. Using the trained
ensemble model, we screen an unlabeled vitrimer dataset containing approximately 1 million hypothetical vitrimers,
identifying candidates with extreme (high and low) Tg values beyond the training domain which are further validated
through MD simulations. To ensure synthesizability, we conduct an additional screening of vitrimers composed of
commercially available carboxylic acids and epoxides, selecting promising candidates for experimental evaluation.
Two novel vitrimers are synthesized and characterized, demonstrating experimentally higher Tg than any bifunctional
transesterification vitrimer reported in the literature. This study demonstrates the feasibility of using MD-generated
3

Datasets
Size
With Tg
Source
Labeled dataset
8,424
Yes
ZINC15 [28]
Hypothetical unlabeled dataset
991,576
No
ZINC15 [28]
Synthesizable unlabeled dataset
259
No
Sigma-Aldrich [29]
Table 1: Three vitrimers datasets used in this work.
data to train ML models in the absence of available experimental data and successfully applies this approach to the
design and validation of novel vitrimers with exceptional properties through experimental synthesis and characteriza-
tion. The proposed framework serves as an effective tool for polymer chemists to design synthesizable polymers with
tailored properties for diverse applications.
2. Methods
2.1. Datasets
We utilize the vitrimer Tg dataset curated in our previous work [17], which comprises 1 million hypothetical
vitrimers randomly sampled from 2.5 billion possible combinations of 50,000 carboxylic acid molecules and 50,000
epoxide molecules derived from the ZINC15 database [28]. Of these, 8,424 vitrimers have Tg values calculated via
molecular dynamics (MD) simulations. A Gaussian process (GP) model is employed to calibrate the MD-calculated
Tg values against experimental data from the literature. For this study, the subset of 8,424 vitrimers with Tg labels
serves as the training dataset for ML models, which is referred to as the labeled dataset. The remaining vitrimers
within the 1 million set are treated as the hypothetical unlabeled dataset. Further details on the datasets and MD
simulations can be found in Supporting Information.
In this work, we also curate a synthesizable dataset to facilitate the experimental synthesis of screened vitrimers.
This dataset is constructed by selecting 37 commercially available bifunctional carboxylic acids and 7 bifunctional
epoxides from the Sigma-Aldrich website [29], yielding a total of 259 vitrimers that can be synthesized using off-the-
shelf chemicals. The sizes and sources of all three datasets are provided in Table 1.
2.2. Feature engineering
We consider six different feature representations as inputs for machine learning models: molecular fingerprints,
RDKit descriptors [20], Mordred descriptors [21], Mol2vec embeddings [27], SMILES [23], and graph-based repre-
sentations. For each vitrimer in the dataset, the repeating unit is obtained by opening the epoxide rings and reacting
them with carboxyl groups (see Figure S1, Supporting Information). These repeating units are then converted into the
specified feature representations, which serve as direct inputs for the ML models. Further details are discussed below.
• For molecular fingerprints, the repeating units are transformed into 2048-bit Morgan fingerprints [30, 22] with
a radius of 3 using the RDKit package [20]. Each bit in the fingerprint vector represents the frequency of a
specific chemical substructure within the vitrimer, a method known as frequency-based molecular fingerprints.
This approach has been shown to outperform traditional binary fingerprints, where each bit only indicates the
presence (1) or absence (0) of a substructure [31]. We select 200 substructures that appear most frequently
across the labeled dataset. Substructures with zero variance (i.e., those with identical occurrence counts across
all labeled vitrimers) are removed. The final fingerprint vector consists of 195 entries, each corresponding to a
specific substructure present in the vitrimers.
• Molecular descriptors for each vitrimer are computed using the RDKit [20] and Mordred [21] packages. Since
certain descriptors are not well defined for some vitrimer chemistries, only those that are valid across both
the labeled and hypothetical unlabeled datasets are retained. Additionally, descriptors with zero variance are
removed. After filtering, 166 RDKit descriptors and 620 Mordred descriptors are selected.
4

• Mol2vec is an unsupervised learning-based approach that represents molecules as fixed-length numerical vec-
tors by learning embeddings of molecular substructures [27]. In this work, we utilize a pretrained Mol2vec
model to encode vitrimers into 300-dimensional vector representations, capturing their structural and chemical
characteristics.
• SMILES: each vitrimer repeating unit is converted into canonical SMILES using the RDKit package [20] where
the asterisk symbol (*) denotes connection sites for the repeating unit.
• Following the approach described by Hickey et al. [32], vitrimers are represented as molecular graphs, where
heavy atoms serve as nodes and bonds as edges. Each node is characterized by atomic features including atom
type, number of hydrogen atoms, valency, neighbor degree and aromaticity. Edge features include bond type,
as well as indicators for whether the bond is conjugated or part of a ring. An adjacency matrix is also extracted
with binary indicators of connectivity between each pair of nodes.
2.3. Machine learning models
With vitrimer repeating units encoded into various feature representations, we proceed with training and evalu-
ating different ML models for Tg prediction. The schematic overview of all ML models is presented in Figure S2
(Supporting Information). We train least absolute shrinkage and selection operator (LASSO), random forest (RF),
support vector regression (SVR), extreme gradient boosting (XGBoost), and feedforward neural network (FFNN)
models using molecular fingerprints, Mol2vec embeddings, RDKit descriptors, and Mordred descriptors. Graph Neu-
ral Networks (GNNs) and Transformer models are trained using graph-based representations and SMILES strings,
respectively. A total number of 22 models are trained and benchmarked in this work. A brief introduction to each
ML model is provided in Supporting Information. The LASSO, RF, and SVR models are implemented using the
scikit-learn library [33], while the XGBoost model is built using the XGBoost package [34]. The FFNN, GNN,
and Transformer models are implemented in PyTorch [35], with the GNN and Transformer architectures adapted
from previous implementations by Hickey et al. [32] and Xu et al. [36], respectively. More details on model ar-
chitectures, training procedures, and hyperparameter tuning are provided in the Supporting Information. To explore
possible enhancement in prediction accuracy, we also employ an ensemble learning approach by averaging the Tg
values predicted by different models. This strategy has been used in previous studies for polymer property prediction
[37, 38, 39]. We evaluate various combinations of all 22 ML models and identify the ensemble that yields the highest
prediction performance on the test set.
The trained ML models not only enable efficient Tg prediction but also provide molecular insights into the key
factors influencing vitrimer Tg. To quantify feature importance, we perform Shapley additive explanations (SHAP)
analysis [40] on the trained LASSO, RF, XGBoost, and FFNN models using molecular fingerprints, RDKit descrip-
tors, and Mordred descriptors. SVR is excluded from this evaluation due to high computational cost. For molecular
fingerprints, RDKit descriptors and Mordred descriptors, we compute the average SHAP values (i.e., feature impor-
tance scores) across all considered ML models and training data. The most impactful substructures and descriptors
are identified based on the highest absolute average SHAP values, providing interpretability into the factors governing
vitrimer Tg.
After training all models and selecting the best-performing one, we proceed with screening the unlabeled datasets.
Each vitrimer in these datasets is preprocessed using the previously discussed feature representations, and its Tg is
predicted using the trained model. Promising candidates are identified for further validation. For candidates from
the hypothetical dataset, MD simulations are performed to compute their Tg, following the same simulation and
calibration protocols used in generating the labeled dataset (details provided in the Supporting Information). For
candidates from the synthesizable dataset, two vitrimers are selected for experimental synthesis and characterization
based on chemical intuition, synthesizability and cost.
2.4. Experimental synthesis and characterization
Two vitrimers are synthesized by crosslinking bisphenol A diglycidyl ether (DGEBA) with D,L-malic acid (MA)
and 2,6-naphthalenedicarboxylic acid (NA), both purchased from Sigma-Aldrich [29]. The crosslinking process in-
volves stirring a mixture of the acids with the epoxide and 5 mol % of the catalyst triazabicyclodecene (TBD) in
the presence of 5 mL of acetone. The mixture is stirred on a hot plate at temperatures ranging from 140 to 170 °C.
5

a
Molecular fingerprints
Mol2vec
b
RDKit descriptors
c
Mordred descriptors
d
Figure 2: Coefficient of determination (R2) and root mean square error (RMSE) between ground truth Tg and predicted Tg of LASSO, RF, SVR,
XGBoost and FFNN models using (a) molecular fingerprints, (b) Mol2vec embeddings, (c) RDKit descriptors and (d) Mordred descriptors. The
error bars indicate standard deviation in the metrics across five-fold cross validation. The best-performing models are highlighted in bold.
Subsequently, the slurry is left in the beaker for 5 to 10 minutes to remove the acetone. The degassed resin is then
transferred into a mold and covered with a top mold for further crosslinking process in a hot press. The MA-based
resin is cured at 140 °C for 5 hours, while the NA-based resin was cured at 280 °C for 6 hours under a constant pres-
sure of 1 MPa. The glass transition temperature (Tg) of the cured samples is determined using differential scanning
calorimetry (DSC) at a heating rate of 5 °C per minute.
3. Results
3.1. Machine learning Tg prediction
The performance of five ML models across four feature representations for Tg prediction on the test set is sum-
marized in Figure 2. XGBoost achieves the highest accuracy using molecular fingerprints, while LASSO outperforms
other models for the remaining three representations. Among 20 (out of overall 22) models evaluated, LASSO with
Mordred descriptors (denoted as LASSO Mordred) demonstrates the highest predictive accuracy, achieving a coeffi-
cient of determination (R2) of 0.76 and a root means square error (RMSE) of 15.72 K. The superior performance of
LASSO Mordred can be attributed to the high dimensionality of Mordred descriptors, which include 620 features, a
greater number than any other feature representation (195, 300, 166 for molecular fingerprints, Mol2vec embeddings
6

a
b
Best ensemble
Figure 3: Performance of other models and ensemble model in Tg prediction. (a) R2 and RMSE between ground truth Tg and predicted Tg of
LASSO Mordred, GNN, Transformer, ensemble of all models and the best ensemble model. (b) Predicted Tg vs. ground truth Tg of the best
ensemble model. The best-performing model is highlighted in bold.
and RDKit descriptors, respectively). Additionally, LASSO incorporates an L1 regularization term, enforcing sparsity
in model coefficients, thereby reducing overfitting and improving the accuracy of Tg predictions.
The performance of LASSO Mordred is compared with GNN and Transformer models in Figure 3a, where it also
demonstrates superior prediction accuracy over the deep learning models. To further improve Tg prediction, we imple-
ment a model ensemble approach by averaging the predicted Tg values from multiple models. We find that an ensem-
ble consisting of XGBoost with fingerprints (XGBoost fp), XGBoost with Mordred descriptors (XGBoost Mordred),
GNN, and Transformer models achieves the highest correlation with ground truth values in the test set, yielding an
R2 value of 0.78 and a RMSE of 15.19 K (Figure 3b). In contrast, an ensemble incorporating all 22 models performs
worse due to redundancy in overlapping features. Notably, the four models in the best-performing ensemble encom-
pass four major types of feature representations: molecular fingerprints, molecular descriptors, graphs, and SMILES
strings. These results suggest that averaging predictions from models with diverse feature representations leads to
higher accuracy than relying on any single model alone, demonstrating the effectiveness of the ensemble learning
approach.
3.2. Interpretability offered by machine learning models
We perform SHAP analysis on the trained models (LASSO, RF, XGBoost, and FFNN) to gain physical insights
into the structure–Tg relationships. For molecular fingerprints and molecular descriptors, we compute SHAP values
for each feature (substructure or descriptor), which quantify the impact of individual features on the Tg of vitrimers.
The ten most impactful substructures are presented in Figures 4, ranked by their relative importance. Substructure
190, identified as the most impactful, negatively influences Tg due to its aliphatic nature which makes polymer chains
more flexible. The positively impactful substructures can be classified into two groups. The first group, comprising
substructures 160, 179, and 147, increases Tg due to their aromaticity and increased chain rigidity. The second group,
including substructures 194, 160, 147, 149, and 188, contains oxygen and nitrogen atoms, which are involved in
hydrogen bonding within the vitrimer network, leading to an increase in Tg. These trends are consistent with previous
experimental studies [41, 42]. Furthermore, our findings align with the work of Tao et al. [12], which identified
similar substructures using a LASSO model trained on an experimental Tg dataset. This consistency with literature
confirms the validity of our results.
The most impactful RDKit descriptors are shown in Figure 4b, with their definitions provided in Table S1 (Sup-
porting Information). The descriptor with the most negative impact, the number of rotatable bonds, decreases vitrimer
chain rigidity, leading to a negative correlation with Tg. The most positively correlated descriptor, VSA Estate2, is
a hybrid descriptor that captures the combined effect of van der Waals surface area and the electrotopological states
of atoms. Another notable descriptor, FractionCSP3, represents the fraction of carbon atoms that are sp3-hybridized
7

a
b
c
Molecular fingerprints
RDKit descriptors
190
194
160
182
191
179
147
149
25
188
Figure 4: Average SHAP values (feature importance scores) of ten most impactful (a) substructures and (b) RDKit descriptors calculated from the
trained LASSO, RF, XGBoost and FFNN models. (c) Schematics of the substructures. The central atom of each substructure is highlighted in blue,
while aromatic atoms are marked in yellow. The connectivity between atoms is represented in light gray.
and negatively impacts Tg due to a more aliphatic and flexible molecular structure. Several identified descriptors have
also been reported in a previous study based on an experimental dataset [43], further validating the effectiveness of
our analysis. The most important Mordred descriptors, along with their descriptions, are presented in Figure S3 and
Table S2 (Supporting Information). Similar to the RDKit descriptors, the most significant Mordred descriptor is the
number of rotatable bonds, demonstrating consistency across different models and providing cross-validation within
this study.
The insights derived from molecular fingerprints and descriptors highlight two primary factors influencing vitrimer
Tg across different scales: chain mobility and molecular interactions. At the polymer chain scale, increased chain flex-
ibility, facilitated by rotatable bonds and aliphatic structures, enhances conformational freedom and segmental motion,
resulting in lower Tg. In contrast, the presence of aromatic rings and bulky side groups contributes to greater chain
rigidity, restricting mobility and leading to higher Tg. At the atomistic scale, molecular interactions, such as hydrogen
bonding and van der Waals forces, strengthen local interactions within the vitrimer network, increasing energy barri-
ers to segmental motion and thereby elevating Tg. These findings offer valuable molecular design guidelines that can
inform the discovery of vitrimers with tailored thermal properties.
3.3. Discovering novel hypothetical vitrimers by virtual screening
After identifying the ensemble model with the best performance on the test set, we proceed with predicting Tg for
all vitrimers in the hypothetical unlabeled dataset (see Table 1). Approximately 100 vitrimers with the highest and
lowest predicted Tg values are selected for validation through MD simulations and calibration. The simulation and
calibration protocols remain consistent with those used in generating the labeled dataset (see Supporting Information
for details). The discovered high-Tg and low-Tg vitrimers successfully expand the property space of the training set
(Figure 5a), potentially broadening the applicability of vitrimers for use in more extreme environments. To further
analyze the distribution of the discovered vitrimers relative to the training data, we apply principal component analysis
(PCA) to reduce the molecular fingerprint representations to two-dimensional vectors. As shown in Figure 5b, the
novel vitrimers extend the chemical space beyond the training regime. The 10 vitrimers with the highest and lowest
Tg are shown in Figure 5 where all presented Tg values are obtained from MD simulations and GP calibration. The
novel low-Tg vitrimers exhibit a range from 218 K to 237 K, while the high-Tg vitrimers range from 510 K to 549 K
(Figure 5c). These results demonstrate that ML-assisted virtual screening enables the identification of novel vitrimers
8

Discovered low-Tg vitrimers
218 K
237 K
223 K
225 K
230 K
230 K
231 K
231 K
234 K
234 K
Discovered high-Tg vitrimers
549 K
510 K
529 K
525 K
521 K
519 K
518 K
515 K
514 K
513 K
a
b
c
Figure 5: Virtual screening of the hypothetical unlabeled dataset (see Table 1) and examples of discovered vitrimers whose Tg is validated by MD
simulations. (a) Tg distribution of the training data and discovered vitrimers. (b) Chemical space of the training data and discovered vitrimers
visualized by PCA of molecular fingerprints. (c) Molecular structures of discovered vitrimers with high and low Tg. All presented Tg values are
obtained from MD simulations.
with desirable properties at a significantly lower cost compared to conventional experimental and simulation-based
approaches.
The most impactful substructure frequencies and descriptors (see Figure 4) of the discovered vitrimers are pre-
sented in Figure S4 (Supporting Information). The occurrence of positively correlated substructures and descriptors
is higher in high-Tg vitrimers, while negatively correlated features are more prevalent in low-Tg vitrimers. This con-
sistency cross-validates our feature importance analysis, demonstrating that the key factors identified in the training
data also apply to novel vitrimers outside the training dataset. These findings further support the universality and
robustness of the interpretable insights offered by our models.
3.4. Experimental synthesis and characterization of discovered vitrimers
To validate the predictive capability and practical relevance of our trained ensemble ML model, we transition from
virtual screening to experimental synthesis. The ensemble model is used to efficiently evaluate the Tg of 259 vitrimer
candidates composed of commercially available acids and epoxides from the Sigma-Aldrich database [29]. Guided by
the model’s Tg predictions, we identify promising candidates exhibiting high thermal performance. These predictions
are further filtered based on chemical intuition, ease of synthesis and purchasing, and material cost, ultimately leading
to the selection of two vitrimer systems for experimental validation (Figure 6a).
Among the screened candidates, vitrimers based on D,L-malic acid (MA) and 2,6-naphthalenedicarboxylic acid
(NA) paired with diglycidyl ether (DGEBA) are selected for synthesis, as they exhibit desired Tg values from the
9

a
Malic acid (MA)
DGEBA
Vitrimer
DGEBA
Vitrimer
2,6-Naphthalenedicarboxylic
acid (NA)
c
d
e
Pristine
Cut
Healed
ML screening
Chemical intuition
Synthesizability
Cost
b
259 vitrimers from
Sigma-Aldrich
Tg = 395 K
Tg = 348 K
TBD
TBD
+
MA+DGEBA
NA+DGEBA
Figure 6: Experimental synthesis and characterization of the discovered novel vitrimers. (a) The trained ensemble model is employed to virtually
screen 259 vitrimers sourced from the Sigma-Aldrich database [29]. By integrating chemical intuition, we evaluate their synthesizability and cost,
ultimately selecting two vitrimers for experimental synthesis and characterization. (b) Synthesis schemes of the vitrimers. (c) DSC results to
measure the Tg of the synthesized vitrimers. (d) Tg of the vitrimers synthesized in this work and bifunctional transesterification vitrimers present
in the literature [44, 45, 46, 17, 10, 47]. (e) Images of pristine, cut and healed vitrimer specimens, demonstrating healability of the synthesized
vitrimers in this work.
ML ensemble model. These acids are associated with structural features—such as aromaticity and limited rotatable
bonds in NA and hydroxyl-rich backbone in MA—that are identified in our SHAP analysis as positively contributing
to Tg, reinforcing the rationale for their selection. The epoxide and acids are cured in the presence of the catalyst
triazabicyclodecene (TBD) for vitrimer synthesis (Figure 6b)
10

Thermal analysis through DSC measurements reveals Tg values of 348 K (75 °C) and 395 K (122 °C) for the
MA-based and NA-based vitrimers, respectively (Figure 6c). Notably, the NA-based vitrimer exhibits a higher Tg
than any bifunctional transesterification vitrimer reported in the literature (see Table S3, Supporting Information) to
the best of our knowledge [44, 45, 46, 17, 10, 47], as shown in Figure 6d. The MA-based vitrimer also demonstrates
a relatively higher Tg compared to most existing bifunctional transesterification vitrimers. The experimental Tg of
both vitrimers agrees well with the ML-predicted Tg (364 and 390 K), indicating the accuracy of our ML model in
predicting the actual Tg of vitrimers. To evaluate the healability of the synthesized vitrimers, pristine specimens are cut
and subsequently healed at elevated temperatures. Microscopic examination of the pristine, cut, and healed samples
(Figure 6e) demonstrates complete damage recovery, confirming the healability of these novel vitrimer chemistries.
The combination of high Tg and self-healing capability validates the effectiveness of our framework in identifying
vitrimers with exceptional properties, thereby broadening the scope of potential vitrimer applications.
4. Conclusions
This work presents an integrated MD-ML virtual screening framework for discovering bifunctional transesterifica-
tion vitrimers. Leveraging MD-generated data from our previous study [17], we systematically evaluate the predictive
performance of ML models for vitrimer Tg. Seven ML models are benchmarked across six molecular representations.
Our findings demonstrate that an ensemble learning approach, which averages predictions from multiple models, out-
performs individual models in Tg prediction. Furthermore, our feature importance analysis provides interpretability,
identifying key structural and chemical factors that govern vitrimer Tg. Using the trained ensemble model, we screen
an unlabeled dataset of approximately 1 million hypothetical vitrimers and discover candidates with extreme Tg values
beyond the training domain. We perform an additional screening of vitrimers composed of commercially available
carboxylic acids and epoxides, identifying promising candidates for experimental evaluation. Two novel vitrimers are
synthesized and characterized, confirming their exceptional properties. Both vitrimers exhibit relatively high Tg, with
one surpassing the Tg of any bifunctional transesterification vitrimer reported in the literature. This study highlights
the feasibility of using MD-generated data to train ML models when experimental data is limited and successfully
demonstrates the application of this approach in designing and validating novel vitrimers in experiments. Although
this work focuses on bifunctional transesterification vitrimers, the presented approach can be readily adapted to other
types of vitrimers and polymers with minimal modifications to the ML model architecture. The proposed framework
provides an effective and efficient tool for polymer chemists to design synthesizable polymers with tailored properties,
expanding the potential applications of vitrimers.
Author contributions
Yiwen Zheng: Conceptualization, Data curation, Formal analysis, Investigation, Methodology, Software, Valida-
tion, Visualization, Writing – original draft, Writing – review and editing. Agni K. Biswal: Conceptualization, Data
curation, Formal analysis, Investigation, Methodology, Visualization, Writing – original draft, Writing – review and
editing. Yaqi Guo: Methodology, Software, Writing – review and editing. Prakash Thakolkaran: Methodology,
Software, Writing – review and editing. Yash Kokane: Methodology, Software, Writing – review and editing. Vikas
Varshney: Methodology, Supervision, Writing – review and editing. Siddhant Kumar: Methodology, Supervision,
Writing – review and editing. Aniruddh Vashisth: Conceptualization, Funding acquisition, Methodology, Project
administration, Resources, Supervision, Writing – review and editing.
Declaration of Competing Interest
The authors declare no competing interests.
Data and code availability
The data and code that support the findings of this study are openly available at https://github.com/vashisth-lab/
VitrimerScreening.
11

Acknowledgments
This work was completed using the advanced computational, storage, and networking infrastructure provided by
the Hyak supercomputer system at the University of Washington, Seattle. YZ would like to thank Clean Energy
Institute (CEI) Fellowship for financial support. This work was partially funded by Amazon Research Awards and
National Science Foundation (NSF) (Award Number 2421235).
References
[1] R. J. Young, P. A. Lovell, Introduction to polymers, CRC press, 2011.
[2] D. Montarnal, M. Capelot, F. Tournilhac, L. Leibler, Silica-like malleable materials from permanent organic networks, Science 334 (6058)
(2011) 965–968.
[3] M. Capelot, M. M. Unterlass, F. Tournilhac, L. Leibler, Catalytic control of the vitrimer glass transition, ACS Macro Letters 1 (7) (2012)
789–792.
[4] Y. Jin, Z. Lei, P. Taynton, S. Huang, W. Zhang, Malleable and recyclable thermosets: the next generation of plastics, Matter 1 (6) (2019)
1456–1493.
[5] B. Krishnakumar, R. P. Sanka, W. H. Binder, V. Parthasarthy, S. Rana, N. Karak, Vitrimers: Associative dynamic covalent adaptive networks
in thermoset polymers, Chemical Engineering Journal 385 (2020) 123820.
[6] E. Hoogeboom, V. G. Satorras, C. Vignac, M. Welling, Equivariant diffusion for molecule generation in 3d, in: International conference on
machine learning, PMLR, 2022, pp. 8867–8887.
[7] T. Hansson, C. Oostenbrink, W. van Gunsteren, Molecular dynamics simulations, Current opinion in structural biology 12 (2) (2002) 190–196.
[8] A. Vashisth, C. Ashraf, W. Zhang, C. E. Bakis, A. C. Van Duin, Accelerated reaxff simulations for describing the reactive cross-linking of
polymers, The Journal of Physical Chemistry A 122 (32) (2018) 6633–6642.
[9] K.-q. Yu, Z.-s. Li, J. Sun, Polymer structures and glass transition: A molecular dynamics simulation study, Macromolecular theory and
simulations 10 (6) (2001) 624–633.
[10] M. Kamble, A. Vashisth, H. Yang, S. Pranompont, C. R. Picu, D. Wang, N. Koratkar, Reversing fatigue in carbon-fiber reinforced vitrimer
composites, Carbon 187 (2022) 108–114.
[11] J. M. Kranenburg, C. A. Tweedie, K. J. van Vliet, U. S. Schubert, Challenges and progress in high-throughput screening of polymer mechan-
ical properties by indentation, Advanced Materials 21 (35) (2009) 3551–3561.
[12] L. Tao, G. Chen, Y. Li, Machine learning discovery of high-temperature polymers, Patterns 2 (4) (2021).
[13] P. Thakolkaran, Y. Zheng, Y. Guo, A. Vashisth, S. Kumar, Deep learning reveals key predictors of thermal conductivity in covalent organic
frameworks, arXiv preprint arXiv:2409.06457 (2024).
[14] R. Batra, H. Dai, T. D. Huan, L. Chen, C. Kim, W. R. Gutekunst, L. Song, R. Ramprasad, Polymers for extreme conditions designed using
syntax-directed variational autoencoders, Chemistry of Materials 32 (24) (2020) 10489–10500.
[15] J. Yang, L. Tao, J. He, J. R. McCutcheon, Y. Li, Machine learning enables interpretable discovery of innovative polymers for gas separation
membranes, Science Advances 8 (29) (2022) eabn9545.
[16] S. Otsuka, I. Kuwajima, J. Hosoya, Y. Xu, M. Yamazaki, Polyinfo: Polymer database for polymeric materials design, in: 2011 International
Conference on Emerging Intelligent Data and Web Technologies, IEEE, 2011, pp. 22–29.
[17] Y. Zheng, P. Thakolkaran, A. K. Biswal, J. A. Smith, Z. Lu, S. Zheng, B. H. Nguyen, S. Kumar, A. Vashisth, Ai-guided inverse design and
discovery of recyclable vitrimeric polymers, Advanced Science 12 (6) (2025) 2411385.
[18] L. Tao, J. He, T. Arbaugh, J. R. McCutcheon, Y. Li, Machine learning prediction on the fractional free volume of polymer membranes, Journal
of Membrane Science 665 (2023) 121131.
[19] T. Xie, H.-K. Kwon, D. Schweigert, S. Gong, A. France-Lanord, A. Khajeh, E. Crabb, M. Puzon, C. Fajardo, W. Powelson, et al., A cloud
platform for automating and sharing analysis of raw simulation data from high throughput polymer molecular dynamics simulations, arXiv
preprint arXiv:2208.01692 (2022).
[20] G. Landrum, P. Tosco, B. Kelley, Ric, D. Cosgrove, sriniker, gedeck, R. Vianello, NadineSchneider, E. Kawashima, D. N, G. Jones, A. Dalke,
B. Cole, M. Swain, S. Turk, AlexanderSavelyev, A. Vaucher, M. W´ojcikowski, I. Take, D. Probst, K. Ujihara, V. F. Scalfani, guillaume godin,
J. Lehtivarjo, A. Pahl, R. Walker, F. Berenger, jasondbiggs, strets123, Rdkit: Open-source cheminformatics., https://www.rdkit.org.
[21] H. Moriwaki, Y.-S. Tian, N. Kawashita, T. Takagi, Mordred: a molecular descriptor calculator, Journal of cheminformatics 10 (1) (2018)
1–14.
[22] D. Rogers, M. Hahn, Extended-connectivity fingerprints, Journal of chemical information and modeling 50 (5) (2010) 742–754.
[23] D. Weininger, Smiles, a chemical language and information system. 1. introduction to methodology and encoding rules, Journal of chemical
information and computer sciences 28 (1) (1988) 31–36.
[24] Z. Wu, S. Pan, F. Chen, G. Long, C. Zhang, S. Y. Philip, A comprehensive survey on graph neural networks, IEEE transactions on neural
networks and learning systems 32 (1) (2020) 4–24.
[25] A. Vaswani, N. Shazeer, N. Parmar, J. Uszkoreit, L. Jones, A. N. Gomez, Ł. Kaiser, I. Polosukhin, Attention is all you need, Advances in
neural information processing systems 30 (2017).
[26] C. Yan, X. Feng, J. Konlan, P. Mensah, G. Li, Overcoming the barrier: designing novel thermally robust shape memory vitrimers by estab-
lishing a new machine learning framework, Physical Chemistry Chemical Physics 25 (43) (2023) 30049–30065.
[27] S. Jaeger, S. Fulle, S. Turk, Mol2vec: unsupervised machine learning approach with chemical intuition, Journal of chemical information and
modeling 58 (1) (2018) 27–35.
[28] T. Sterling, J. J. Irwin, Zinc 15–ligand discovery for everyone, Journal of chemical information and modeling 55 (11) (2015) 2324–2337.
[29] Sigma-Aldrich, https://www.sigmaaldrich.com/US/en, accessed: February 2025.
12

[30] H. L. Morgan, The generation of a unique machine description for chemical structures-a technique developed at chemical abstracts service.,
Journal of chemical documentation 5 (2) (1965) 107–113.
[31] L. Tao, V. Varshney, Y. Li, Benchmarking machine learning models for polymer informatics: an example of glass transition temperature,
Journal of Chemical Information and Modeling 61 (11) (2021) 5395–5413.
[32] K. Hickey, J. Feinstein, G. Sivaraman, M. MacDonell, E. Yan, C. Matherson, S. Coia, J. Xu, K. Picel, Applying machine learning and
quantum chemistry to predict the glass transition temperatures of polymers, Computational Materials Science 238 (2024) 112933.
[33] F. Pedregosa, G. Varoquaux, A. Gramfort, V. Michel, B. Thirion, O. Grisel, M. Blondel, P. Prettenhofer, R. Weiss, V. Dubourg, et al.,
Scikit-learn: Machine learning in python, the Journal of machine Learning research 12 (2011) 2825–2830.
[34] T. Chen, C. Guestrin, Xgboost: A scalable tree boosting system, in: Proceedings of the 22nd acm sigkdd international conference on
knowledge discovery and data mining, 2016, pp. 785–794.
[35] A. Paszke, S. Gross, F. Massa, A. Lerer, J. Bradbury, G. Chanan, T. Killeen, Z. Lin, N. Gimelshein, L. Antiga, et al., Pytorch: An imperative
style, high-performance deep learning library, Advances in neural information processing systems 32 (2019).
[36] C. Xu, Y. Wang, A. Barati Farimani, Transpolymer: a transformer-based language model for polymer property predictions, npj Computational
Materials 9 (1) (2023) 64.
[37] Y. S. AlFaraj, S. Mohapatra, P. Shieh, K. E. Husted, D. G. Ivanoff, E. M. Lloyd, J. C. Cooper, Y. Dai, A. P. Singhal, J. S. Moore, et al., A
model ensemble approach enables data-driven property prediction for chemically deconstructable thermosets in the low-data regime, ACS
Central Science 9 (9) (2023) 1810–1819.
[38] H. Esmaeili, R. Rizvi, An accelerated strategy to characterize mechanical properties of polymer composites using the ensemble learning
approach, Computational Materials Science 229 (2023) 112432.
[39] W. Gao, H. Wang, Y. Xu, Y. Yang, Q. Gu, X. Duan, B. Wang, X. Zhou, Accurately predicting multiple performance of 3d printing photopoly-
mers using ensemble learning, ACS Applied Polymer Materials 6 (8) (2024) 4501–4508.
[40] S. Lundberg, A unified approach to interpreting model predictions, arXiv preprint arXiv:1705.07874 (2017).
[41] K. Naito, A. Miura, Molecular design for nonpolymeric organic dye glasses with thermal stability: relations between thermodynamic param-
eters and amorphous properties, The Journal of Physical Chemistry 97 (23) (1993) 6240–6248.
[42] P. C. Painter, J. F. Graf, M. M. Coleman, Effect of hydrogen bonding on the enthalpy of mixing and the composition dependence of the glass
transition temperature in polymer blends, Macromolecules 24 (20) (1991) 5630–5638.
[43] A. Babbar, S. Ragunathan, D. Mitra, A. Dutta, T. K. Patra, Explainability and extrapolation of machine learning models for predicting the
glass transition temperature of polymers, Journal of Polymer Science 62 (6) (2024) 1175–1186.
[44] S. Shen, V. K. Thakur, A. A. Skordos, Influence of monomer structure and catalyst concentration on topological transition and dynamic
properties of dicarboxylic acid-epoxy vitrimers, Journal of Applied Polymer Science 141 (40) (2024) e56028.
[45] S. Kaiser, P. Novak, M. Giebler, M. Gschwandl, P. Novak, G. Pilz, M. Morak, S. Schl¨ogl, The crucial role of external force in the estimation
of the topology freezing transition temperature of vitrimers by elongational creep measurements, Polymer 204 (2020) 122804.
[46] A. M. Hubbard, Y. Ren, D. Konkolewicz, A. Sarvestani, C. R. Picu, G. S. Kedziora, A. Roy, V. Varshney, D. Nepal, Vitrimer transition
temperature identification: coupling various thermomechanical methodologies, ACS Applied Polymer Materials 3 (4) (2021) 1756–1766.
[47] K. Tangthana-Umrung, Q. A. Poutrel, M. Gresil, Epoxy homopolymerization as a tool to tune the thermo-mechanical properties and fracture
toughness of vitrimers, Macromolecules 54 (18) (2021) 8393–8406.
13

Toward Sustainable Polymer Design: A Molecular Dynamics-Informed Machine
Learning Approach for Vitrimers
Supporting Information
Yiwen Zhenga, Agni K. Biswala, Yaqi Guob, Prakash Thakolkaranb, Yash Kokanea, Vikas Varshneyc, Siddhant
Kumarb, Aniruddh Vashistha,∗
aDepartment of Mechanical Engineering, University of Washington, Seattle, WA, USA
bDepartment of Materials Science and Engineering, Delft University of Technology, Delft, The Netherlands
cMaterials and Manufacturing Directorate, Air Force Research Laboratory, Wright-Patterson Air Force Base, OH, USA
1. Vitrimer datasets and virtual screening
In this work, we utilize the vitrimer dataset developed in our previous study [1], which consists of 1 million
hypothetical vitrimers sampled from random combinations of 50,000 bifunctional carboxylic acid and 50,000 bifunc-
tional epoxide molecules derived from the ZINC15 database [2]. To compute Tg, MD simulations are performed on
8,424 vitrimers randomly sampled from the 1 million dataset. For each vitrimer composition, the acid and epoxide
monomers are alternately connected to construct a polymer chain of approximately 1,000 atoms. The initial configura-
tion consists of four such chains, which undergo energy minimization and annealing to eliminate local heterogeneities.
The annealed system is then gradually cooled from 800 K to 100 K, with system density recorded at each temperature.
The Tg value is determined as the intersection point of the bilinear fit of the density-temperature profile. To reduce
uncertainty arising from the stochastic nature of MD simulations, five replicate simulations are conducted for each
vitrimer, and the final Tg is obtained by averaging across these replicates.
Due to differences in time and length scales between MD simulations and real experiments, MD-calculated Tg
values are typically overestimated compared to experimental measurements. To account for this artifact, the MD-
calculated Tg is further calibrated against experimental values using a Gaussian Process (GP) model. The GP model
is trained to predict the offset between experimental and MD-calculated Tg based on a polymer dataset with experi-
mentally measured Tg values from the literature. Once trained, the model is applied to estimate the experimental-MD
Tg offset for all 8,424 vitrimers, and the MD-calculated Tg values are subsequently calibrated to approximate exper-
imental Tg. The calibrated Tg serves as a proxy for experimental Tg and is used as the ground truth for ML model
training in this work. More details on the MD simulations and GP calibration process can be found in our previous
study [1].
The 8,424 vitrimers with their associated calibrated Tg values constitute the labeled dataset (Table 1 in the
manuscript), which is used to train the ML models. The remaining 991,576 vitrimers form the hypothetical unla-
beled dataset (Table 1 in the manuscript). Additionally, we construct a synthesizable unlabeled dataset (Table 1 in the
manuscript) by selecting 37 commercially available bifunctional carboxylic acids and 7 bifunctional epoxides from
the Sigma-Aldrich database [3]. Once the ML models are trained and the best-performing model is identified, we use
it to predict the Tg values of vitrimers in both unlabeled datasets, facilitating the discovery of novel vitrimers with
desirable properties. For vitrimers identified from the hypothetical unlabeled dataset, their Tg values are further vali-
dated using the previously described MD simulations and Gaussian Process (GP) calibration. For vitrimers selected
from the synthesizable unlabeled dataset, we examine their synthesizability and select two candidates for experimental
synthesis and characterization.
∗Email: vashisth@uw.edu
Preprint submitted to Elsevier
March 31, 2025
arXiv:2503.20956v1  [cond-mat.mtrl-sci]  26 Mar 2025

2. Details on machine learning models
In this work, we train and benchmark seven different ML models covering six feature representations, as shown
in Figure S2. A brief introduction of each ML model is given below.
• Least absolute shrinkage and selection operator (LASSO): LASSO is a regression technique that performs
variable selection and regularization by imposing an L1 penalty on the regression coefficients, shrinking some
to zero to improve model interpretability and prevent overfitting.
• Random forest (RF): RF is a machine learning method that constructs multiple decision trees during training
and combines their outputs to improve prediction accuracy and reduce overfitting.
• Support vector regression (SVR): SVR is a machine learning technique based on support vector machines
that fits a hyperplane or curve within a specified margin of tolerance to predict continuous outcomes, while
minimizing model complexity and ensuring robustness to outliers.
• Extreme gradient boosting (XGBoost): XGBoost is a machine learning method based on gradient boosting,
which builds multiple decision trees sequentially, optimizing residual errors and using techniques like regular-
ization and parallel processing to enhance performance and prevent overfitting.
• Feedforward neural network (FFNN): FFNN is a type of artificial neural network where information flows from
input to output layers through one or more hidden layers, without any cycles or loops.
• Graph neural network (GNN): GNN a type of neural network designed to process data represented as graphs
by leveraging the graph structure, updating node embeddings through iterative message passing between nodes
and edges.
• Transformer: A Transformer is a neural network architecture based on self-attention mechanisms, designed to
process sequential data by capturing long-range dependencies and contextual relationships.
The FFNN models consist of hidden layers of equal dimensions with the ReLU activation function. The GNN
model is implemented following the architecture by Hickey et al. [4], which involves alternating graph convolutional
layers and fully connected hidden layers. The Transformer model is adapted from the pretrained TransPolymer model
[5] and fine-tuned using the vitrimer dataset. All models are trained and optimized using a five-fold cross-validation
approach. For all models except the Transformer, hyperparameters are selected through 100 iterations of randomized
search across the parameter space, aiming to minimize the average root mean square error (RMSE) on the validation
set across all five folds. The hyperparameters of the Transformer model are determined by evaluating 12 combinations
of the recommended hyperparameters in the original study [5]. For deep learning models (FFNN, GNN, and Trans-
former), training is conducted for 100 epochs per fold, except for the Transformer, which is trained for 30 epochs. The
best-performing model is selected based on the epoch achieving the lowest RMSE on the validation set. The trained
models are subsequently used to predict Tg for the test set, and their performance is assessed using the coefficient
of determination (R2) and RMSE. Each performance metric is averaged over the five models obtained from the five
cross-validation folds, and both the mean and standard deviation are reported, as shown in Figure 2 and Figure 3 of
the manuscript.
Apart from individual models, we find that averaging predictions from multiple models improves prediction per-
formance on the test set, a strategy commonly referred to as the ensemble learning approach. The predicted Tg
values for the test set are averaged across 20 trained models, comprising five cross-validation folds each of XG-
Boost fp, XGBoost Mordred, GNN, and Transformer models, and compared against the ground truth Tg (Figure 3 in
the manuscript). This ensemble model is further employed to predict Tg for the unlabeled datasets, facilitating the
discovery of novel vitrimers with desirable properties.
2

Descriptor
Definition
NumRotatableBonds
Number of rotatable bonds
VSA EState2
The contribution of electrotopological states of all atoms whose contribu-
tion to Van der Waals surface area lies between 4.78 and 5
fr ether
Number of ether oxygens (including phenoxy)
fr NH0
Number of tertiary amines
SMR VSA10
The contribution of Van der Waals surface area of all atoms whose contri-
bution to molecular refractivity is larger than 4
FractionCSP3
Fraction of carbon atoms that are sp3 hybridized
fr amide
Number of amides
fr C O
Number of carbonyl oxygen atoms
Chi0
Sum of 1/ √di over all heavy atoms i with di > 0; di is the number of heavy
neighbor atoms
VSA EState1
The contribution of electrotopological states of all atoms whose contribu-
tion to Van der Waals surface area is smaller than 4.78
Table S1: Description of the RDKit descriptors presented in Figure 4 of the manuscript.
Descriptor
Definition
RotRatio
Rotatable bonds ratio
nHBAcc
Number of hydrogen bond acceptors
SdO
Sum of electrotopological state indices of atom type dO
SLogP VSA10
The contribution of Van der Waals surface area of all atoms whose contri-
bution to LogP lies between 0.4 and 0.5
AETA beta s
Averaged sigma contribution to valence electron mobile count
piPC6
6-ordered pi-path count (log scale)
MIC3
3-ordered modified information content
GATS2dv
Geary coefficient of lag 2 weighted by valence electrons
FilterItLogS
Solubility parameter
SpDiam Dt
Spectral diamiter from detourn matrix
Table S2: Description of the Mordred descriptors presented in Figure S3.
3

Acid
Epoxide
Tg (K)
Reference
Tetradecanedioic acid
DGEBA
277
Shen et al. (2024) [6]
Dodecanedioic acid
DGEBA
292
Kaiser et al. (2020) [7]
Suberic acid
DGEBA
303
Shen et al. (2024) [6]
Sebacic acid
DGEBA
309
Hubbard et al. (2021) [8]
CHOA
DGEBA
314
Zheng et al. (2025) [1]
Adipic acid
DGEBA
317
Kamble et al. (2022) [9]
CHDA
DGEBA
363
Tangthana-Umrung et al. (2021) [10]
Table S3: Glass transition temperature (Tg) of bifunctional transesterification vitrimers in the literature. Abbreviations: DGEBA →bisphenol A
diglycidyl ether; CHDA →1,4-cyclohexane dicarboxylic acid; CHOA →4-[3-(3-carboxypropanoyloxy)-2-hydroxypropoxy]-4-oxobutanoic acid.
4

Figure S1: Formation of vitrimer repeating unit by opening epoxide rings and reacting with carboxylic acids. The asterisk (*) symbol denotes
polymer connection sites.
Vitrimer repeating units
Molecular 
fingerprints
Mol2vec
embeddings
RDKit
descriptors
Mordred
descriptors
Graphs
SMILES
LASSO
RF
SVR
XGBoost
FFNN
GNN
Transformer
Predicted Tg
Figure S2: Schematic overview of the 22 ML models covered in this work. Vitrimer repeating units are converted into six different types of feature
representations, which are subsequently input into seven ML models for Tg prediction.
5

Figure S3: SHAP values (feature importance scores) of ten most impactful Mordred descriptors.
a
b
Molecular fingerprints
RDKit descriptors
Figure S4: Distribution of most impactful (a) substructures and (b) RDKit descriptors of discovered novel vitrimers.
6

MA+DGEBA
predicted Tg = 364 K
NA+DGEBA
predicted Tg = 390 K
Figure S5: Distribution of ML-predicted Tg of the unlabeled synthesizable dataset.
7

References
[1] Y. Zheng, P. Thakolkaran, A. K. Biswal, J. A. Smith, Z. Lu, S. Zheng, B. H. Nguyen, S. Kumar, A. Vashisth, Ai-guided inverse design and
discovery of recyclable vitrimeric polymers, Advanced Science 12 (6) (2025) 2411385.
[2] T. Sterling, J. J. Irwin, Zinc 15–ligand discovery for everyone, Journal of chemical information and modeling 55 (11) (2015) 2324–2337.
[3] Sigma-Aldrich, https://www.sigmaaldrich.com/US/en, accessed: February 2025.
[4] K. Hickey, J. Feinstein, G. Sivaraman, M. MacDonell, E. Yan, C. Matherson, S. Coia, J. Xu, K. Picel, Applying machine learning and
quantum chemistry to predict the glass transition temperatures of polymers, Computational Materials Science 238 (2024) 112933.
[5] C. Xu, Y. Wang, A. Barati Farimani, Transpolymer: a transformer-based language model for polymer property predictions, npj Computational
Materials 9 (1) (2023) 64.
[6] S. Shen, V. K. Thakur, A. A. Skordos, Influence of monomer structure and catalyst concentration on topological transition and dynamic
properties of dicarboxylic acid-epoxy vitrimers, Journal of Applied Polymer Science 141 (40) (2024) e56028.
[7] S. Kaiser, P. Novak, M. Giebler, M. Gschwandl, P. Novak, G. Pilz, M. Morak, S. Schl¨ogl, The crucial role of external force in the estimation
of the topology freezing transition temperature of vitrimers by elongational creep measurements, Polymer 204 (2020) 122804.
[8] A. M. Hubbard, Y. Ren, D. Konkolewicz, A. Sarvestani, C. R. Picu, G. S. Kedziora, A. Roy, V. Varshney, D. Nepal, Vitrimer transition
temperature identification: coupling various thermomechanical methodologies, ACS Applied Polymer Materials 3 (4) (2021) 1756–1766.
[9] M. Kamble, A. Vashisth, H. Yang, S. Pranompont, C. R. Picu, D. Wang, N. Koratkar, Reversing fatigue in carbon-fiber reinforced vitrimer
composites, Carbon 187 (2022) 108–114.
[10] K. Tangthana-Umrung, Q. A. Poutrel, M. Gresil, Epoxy homopolymerization as a tool to tune the thermo-mechanical properties and fracture
toughness of vitrimers, Macromolecules 54 (18) (2021) 8393–8406.
8
