Assessing and Improving Machine Learning Model Predictions of Polymer  
Glass Transition Temperatures 
 
Manav Ramprasad1 and Chiho Kim2 
1Joseph Wheeler High School, 375 Holt Road, Marietta, GA 30068, US 
2School of Materials Science and Engineering, Georgia Institute of Technology, 771 
Ferst Dr. NW, Atlanta, GA 30332, US 
 
The success of the Materials Genome Initiative has led to opportunities for data-driven 
approaches for materials discovery. The recent development of Polymer Genome (PG), 
which is a machine learning (ML) based data-driven informatics platform for polymer 
property prediction, has significantly increased the efficiency of polymer design. 
Nevertheless, continuous expansion of the ‘training data’ is necessary to improve the 
robustness, versatility and accuracy of the ML predictions. In order to test the 
performance and transferability of the predictive models presently available in PG (which 
were previously trained on a dataset of 450 polymers), we have carefully collected 
additional experimental glass transition temperature (Tg) data for 871 polymers from 
multiple data sources. The Tg values predicted by the present PG models for the polymers 
in the newly collected dataset were compared directly with the experimental Tg to estimate 
the accuracy of the present model. Using the full dataset of 1321 polymers, a new ML 
model for Tg was built following past work. The RMSE of prediction for the extended 
dataset, when compared to the earlier one, decreased to 27 K from 57 K. To further 
improve the performance of the  Tg prediction model, we are continuing to accumulate 
new data and exploring new ML approaches. 
 
 
Introduction 
 
Polymers, displaying a dizzying diversity of physical and chemical properties, constitute 
an important and ubiquitous class of materials (1). Although they are made up of a certain 
number of atomic species found from the periodic table, such as C, H, and O, this 

seemingly limited chemical palette leads to a rich and diverse spectrum of distinct 
polymers with a broad range of property values. Thus, it is highly non-trivial to find a 
suitable optimal polymer for a particular application with desired properties in the 
practically infinite chemical space. As a result, selection of polymers has hitherto 
proceeded largely by intuition and trial-and-error efforts, which generally tend to shape 
the materials discovery landscape in a painstakingly slow manner. 
 
In 2011, the White House unveiled the Materials Genome Initiative (MGI) to accelerate 
the discovery, manufacture and deployment of advanced materials twice as fast as in the 
past but at a fraction of the cost (2). One of the central pillars of the MGI is to utilize data-
driven approaches, such as machine learning (ML), to speed up materials discovery, 
including in polymer science and engineering. Data-driven ML approaches are 
complementary to traditional approaches practiced in materials science and engineering 
(3). ML approaches utilize prior data, information and knowledge in an effective and 
efficient manner, as has been demonstrated in many other domains in the past. Classic 
examples of the ML approaches include facial, fingerprint or object recognition systems, 
machines that can play sophisticated games such as chess, Go or poker, and automation 
systems such as in robotics or self-driving cars (4). 
 
Within the domain of materials science and engineering, the synthesis and testing 
process in the laboratory tends to be expensive and time-consuming especially when 
handling the polymeric system. In order to utilize the data-driven framework, a dataset of 
several similar materials and their properties must be first collected. This data constitutes 
“prior knowledge” on this situation, i.e., the data is obtained from previously performed 
dedicated experiments or from the literature. Each of the materials in the dataset is then 
converted to a unique numerical representation, typically referred to as the “fingerprint”. 
Finally, a mapping is established between the fingerprint and their properties using ML 
algorithms such as Gaussian process regression (GPR), thus leading to a predictive 
surrogate model (5). Subsequently, this model can be used to make instantaneous 
predictions of the properties of a new material, by simply following the fingerprinting and 
mapping procedures. The essential elements of this workflow are portrayed in Figure 1. 

 
 
 
Figure 1. The key elements of machine learning in materials science. a. Schematic view 
of an example data set. b. Statement of the problem “What is the Tg of new polymer?” c. 
Creation of a prediction model via the fingerprinting and learning steps. 
 
The efficacy of this philosophy has been recently demonstrated as part of the “Polymer 
Genome” (PG) Project (6). In order to improve upon the predictive capabilities of the ML 
models implemented, data collection is extremely important. The present work deals with 
testing the capability of PG on new polymers, and using the results of this test to improve 
the predictive models. The property chosen for this test is the glass transition temperature, 
Tg, the temperature above which a polymer transitions from glass-like to rubber-like. Tg is 
an enormously important property in many applications, as it determines the temperature 
ranges at which it is safe to use a polymer. Previously, the model hosted by PG was 
trained on 450 polymers. Current work demonstrates how the expansion of the dataset 
affects the performance of the ML model. We have collected additional experimental Tg 
data for 871 polymers. The predictions of PG for these new polymers were compared 
directly with the collected Tg data, and conclusions have been drawn regarding the 
deficiencies of PG. The original training set was then augmented with this new data, 
retraining was performed, and this has led to an improvement in the predictive capability 
of PG. 
Prior knowledge (dataset)
Polymer
Tg (K)
1. Polystyrene
373
2. Poly(propylene)
264
3. Polyethylene oxide
206
…
…
Fingerprinting, learning and prediction
Polymer
Fingerprint
Tg (K)
1. Polystyrene
X11, X12, X13, … , X1M
373
2. Poly(propylene)
X21, X22, X23, … , X2M
264
3. Polyethylene oxide
X31, X32, X33, … , X3M
206
…
…
Fingerprinting
Learning
New case
Instant property prediction
ML model
f(Xi1, Xi2, Xi3, …, XiM) = Tg(i)
Polymer
Tg (K)
New polymer
?
(a)
(b)
(c)

 
 
Results  
 
Although efficient, ML models are accurate and reliable only within the domain of the 
dataset the model was trained on. Predictions made for cases that fall outside the domain 
of the training data (i.e., the dataset originally used to create the models) are not expected 
to be reliable. In such cases, the new data points that fall outside the original domain of 
applicability have to be necessarily included in a retraining process to make the predictive 
model more versatile and transferable. 
 
We refer to the earlier version of PG that was trained on 450 Tg values as PG-0. The 
newer version of PG in which the new Tg data for 871 additional polymers has been 
infused is referred to as PG-1 (Details of data distribution and example polymers in the 
dataset are shown in the section Methods). Since PG-0 was trained on the original 450 
data points, the predictions for those 450 points are fairly accurate. The prediction for the 
new polymers, on the other hand, is inaccurate and uncertainty of the prediction is higher. 
Figure 2(a) shows a parity plot of the performance of PG-0 on both the new dataset of 
871 polymers and the initial 450. As can be seen, while many polymers fall on the parity 
line indicating good agreement between predicted and actual values, predictions for a 
certain portion of new polymers are off the parity line.  
 
The poor predictive capabilities for those points in the range 300 K - 500 K is mainly due 
to the difference of fingerprint for the new data points compared to that of the benchmark 
data points. In the case of very high Tg values, the PG-0 model performs poorly due to a 
lack of benchmark data points in the high Tg region (see also Figure 3 that shows the 
distribution of Tg values found in the original and the new datasets). In all cases for which 
the predictions are poor, the uncertainty of the predictions, which is depicted by error bar 
around data points in Figure 2, is relatively higher than those for the original 450 polymers. 
Higher uncertainty for a particular case indicates that the polymer is ‘not very similar’ to 
the 450 training set polymers of PG-0. Overall, the performance in terms of the root mean 

square error (RMSE) for PG-0 is greater than 50 K for the set of new 871 polymers. This 
RMSE is higher than desired for Tg predictions (below 30 K). This observation indicates 
that more data points are necessary to improve the predictive performance of the ML 
model.  
 
 
 
Figure 2. Performance of ML prediction model. Comparison of models trained on (a) 450 
previous polymers and (b) 1321 polymers including 871 new polymers. Error bar 
represents GPR uncertainty (confidence of prediction). 
 
 
Next, the 871 new polymers and their corresponding Tg values were used to augment the 
original Tg dataset used for PG-0, followed by retraining to create a new PG-1 GPR 
predictive model for Tg. Figure 2(b) shows the performance of the PG-1 model. As can 
be seen, a remarkable improvement in predictions emerges. The RMSE in this case is 
well below 30 K which is acceptable, as the uncertainties in the actual measurement of 
Tg is in the same range. In addition, the uncertainties calculated by GPR shown by the 
yellow error bars have also decreased significantly, again showing an improvement in 
prediction capabilities. Relative to the original dataset, the new dataset has specifically 
added polymers in new chemical spaces, and has added polymers with high Tg values, 
Overall, R2=0.71, RMSE=57 K
(a)
(b)
Overall, R2=0.92, RMSE=27 K

i.e., in the 500-700K range. These aspects have led to a significantly better predictive 
capability of PG. Further progress can occur by systematically adding more diverse data. 
 
 
Discussion 
 
Many other properties of polymers, besides Tg, are important as well. In addition to the Tg 
prediction, PG also offers predictions of other properties including 1) electronic properties 
like band gap, ionization energy and electron affinity, 2) dielectric and optical properties 
such as the dielectric constant and the refractive index, 3) physical and thermodynamic 
properties like density and atomization energy, 4) solubility properties like Hildebrand 
solubility parameter and list of solvent and non-solvent, 5) mechanical properties like 
tensile strength and Young’s modulus, and 6) permeability properties like gas (He, H2, 
CO2, N2, O2, and CH4) permeability. Each of these predictive models within PG can 
potentially go through an improvement due to new data infusion.  
 
In summary, to improve upon an existing machine learning model to predict polymer glass 
transition temperatures (Tg), a comprehensive dataset of Polymer Tg was collected. 
Machine learning predictions for these new polymers revealed the deficiencies of the 
previous model. In retraining the machine learning model on the new data, the 
performance of the predictions dramatically improved. This work has thus led to a Tg 
prediction model that has been exposed to a more diverse dataset than before, and is 
hence more versatile. The new prediction model presented for Tg, as well as the other 
polymer properties listed above is available for free at the Polymer Genome online 
platform (https://www.polymergenome.org/). Looking further into the future, it would be 
useful if the prediction pipeline can be inverted, i.e., if polymers can be recommended 
that meet a specific set of property objectives, such as Tg between 600 K and 650 K, and 
band gap between 4 eV and 5 eV. A variety of artificial intelligence based algorithms (7,8) 
may be utilized for such purposes. Solving this inverse problem effectively will significantly 
accelerate polymer discovery. 
 

 
Methods 
 
Data for this work were obtained from publicly-available collections of experimental 
measurements (9, 10) and an online repository of polymer properties (11). The polymer 
dataset is highly diverse and the constituent polymers are composed of nine atomic 
species: C, H, O, N, S, F, Cl, Br and I. The Tg of the 1321 polymers (450 polymers from 
previous work and 871 newly collected polymers) in the dataset varied widely, ranging 
from 76 K to 873 K with a mean of 354 K (Figure 3). The repeat unit of the polymers were 
represented using the simplified molecular-input line-entry system (SMILES) (12). 
Examples of SMILES representation are shown in Figure 3(b) with original name of 
polymers and experimental Tg. 
 
 
Figure 3. (a) Distribution of the Tg values for all the polymers considered in this work. (b) 
Sample polymer dataset with SMILES representation and experimental Tg values. 
 
In order to capture the key features that may control the Tg, we utilized the hierarchical 
polymer fingerprinting scheme (13). The fingerprint building process consists of three 
hierarchical levels of features. The first one is at the atomic scale wherein the occurrence 
of atomic fragments. For 1321 polymers, there are 128 such components. The next level 
deals with quantitative structure property relationship (QSPR) descriptors (14), such as 
Polymer name
SMILES
Tg (K)
Polystyrene
CC(C1=CC=CC=C1)
373
Poly(propylene)
CC(C)
264
Poly(caprolactone)
CCCCCOC(=O)
208
Poly(ethylene adipate)
CCCCC(=O)OCCOC(=O)
230
Poly(ethylene glycol)
CCOCCO
206
Polyglycolide
CC(=O)O
312
Polyacetal
COCO
211
Poly(phenylene sulfide) 
C(C=C1)=CC=C1S
391
Poly(p-xylene)
CC(C=C1)=CC=C1C
343
…
…
…
(a)
(b)

estimated surface area of polymer repeating unit, and fraction of rotatable bonds. Such 
descriptors, 39 in total, form the next set of components of our overall fingerprint. The 
third level descriptors captured morphological features such as the topological distance 
between aromatic rings and the length of side-chains. We include 22 morphological 
features in the fingerprint.  
 
The ML model was built by mapping the descriptors to the Tg values using GPR with a 
sum-kernel consisting of a radial basis function kernel and a white-noise kernel. Within 
this scheme, data points with fingerprint very close to the new fingerprint value will be 
weighted more than data points with fingerprints farther away from the fingerprints of the 
new data point. This means that if the new polymer is similar in terms of fingerprint to 
some polymers already in the data set used for training the ML model, GPR will give a Tg 
value close to that of the similar polymers. Details of the approach used may be found in 
previously published work (13). 
 
 
References 
1. Krevelen, Dirk Willem van. “Properties of Polymers: Their Correlation with Chemical 
Structure” Elsevier, 1997. 
2. “Materials Genome Initiative.” www.mgi.gov   
3. Ramprasad, R., Batra, R., Pilania, G., Mannodi-Kanakkithodi, A., and Kim, C.  
“Machine Learning in Materials Informatics: Recent Applications and Prospects” npj 
Computational Materials Vol. 3, 54, 2017. 
4. Jordan, M. I. and Mitchell, T. M. “Machine Learning: Trends, Perspectives, and 
Prospects” Science 349, 255 - 260, 2015. 
5. Williams, C. K. I., and Rasmussen, C. E. “Gaussian Processes for Regression. 
Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems 8” MIT Press: Cambridge, MA, 
1996. 
6. “Polymer Genome: An informatics platform for polymer property prediction and 
design using machine learning” www.polymergenome.org 

7. “Intuitively Understanding Variational Autoencoders” (2018, Feb 4) 
https://towardsdatascience.com/intuitively-understanding-variational-autoencoders-
1bfe67eb5daf 
8. Sadeghi, J., Sadeghi, S., and Niaki, Seyed Taghi A. "Optimizing a hybrid vendor-
managed inventory and transportation problem with fuzzy demand: An improved 
particle swarm optimization algorithm". Information Sciences. Vol. 272, 126 - 144. 
2014. doi:10.1016/j.ins.2014.02.075. 
9. Brandup, J., Immergut, E.H., and Grulke, E.A., “Polymer Handbook, 4th ed.” John 
Wiley and Sons, New York, 1999. 
10. Askadskii, A. A., “Computational Materials Science of Polymers” Cambridge: 
Cambridge Int., 2003. 
11. “Polymer Properties Database” http://polymerdatabase.com 
12. Weininger , D. “SMILES, a Chemical Language and Information System. 1. 
Introduction to Methodology and Encoding Rules” J. Chem. Inf. Model. Vol. 28, 31 - 
36, 1988. 
13. Kim, C., Chandrasekaran, A., Huan, T.D., Das, D., and Ramprasad, R. “Polymer 
Genome: A Data-powered Polymer Informatics Platform for Property Predictions” J. 
Phys. Chem. C Vol. 122, 17575 - 17585, 2018. 
14. Nantasenamat, C., Isarankura-Na-Ayudhya, C., Naenna, T., Prachayasittikul, V. A 
“Practical Overview of Quantitative Structure-Activity Relationship.” Excli J. Vol. 8, 74 
- 88, 2009. 
