1
A Survey of Uncertainty in Deep Neural Networks
Jakob Gawlikowski (Student Member, IEEE), Cedrique Rovile Njieutcheu Tassi, Mohsin Ali, Jongseok Lee,
Matthias Humt, Jianxiang Feng, Anna Kruspe, Rudolph Triebel, Peter Jung (Member, IEEE), Ribana Roscher
(Member, IEEE), Muhammad Shahzad (Member IEEE), Wen Yang (Senior Member, IEEE), Richard Bamler
(Fellow, IEEE), Xiao Xiang Zhu (Fellow, IEEE)
Abstract—Over the last decade, neural networks have reached
almost every ﬁeld of science and became a crucial part of
various real world applications. Due to the increasing spread,
conﬁdence in neural network predictions became more and
more important. However, basic neural networks do not deliver
certainty estimates or suffer from over or under conﬁdence,
i.e. are badly calibrated. To overcome this, many researchers
have been working on understanding and quantifying uncertainty
in a neural network’s prediction. As a result, different types
and sources of uncertainty have been identiﬁed and a variety
of approaches to measure and quantify uncertainty in neural
networks have been proposed. This work gives a comprehensive
overview of uncertainty estimation in neural networks, reviews
recent advances in the ﬁeld, highlights current challenges, and
identiﬁes potential research opportunities. It is intended to give
anyone interested in uncertainty estimation in neural networks
a broad overview and introduction, without presupposing prior
knowledge in this ﬁeld. For that, a comprehensive introduction
to the most crucial sources of uncertainty is given and their
separation into reducible model uncertainty and not reducible
data uncertainty is presented. The modeling of these uncertain-
ties based on deterministic neural networks, Bayesian neural
networks, ensemble of neural networks, and test-time data
augmentation approaches is introduced and different branches of
these ﬁelds as well as the latest developments are discussed. For
a practical application, we discuss different measures of uncer-
tainty, approaches for the calibration of neural networks and give
an overview of existing baselines and available implementations.
Different examples from the wide spectrum of challenges in the
ﬁelds of medical image analysis, robotic and earth observation
give an idea of the needs and challenges regarding uncertainties
in practical applications of neural networks. Additionally, the
practical limitations of uncertainty quantiﬁcation methods in
neural networks for mission- and safety-critical real world
applications are discussed and an outlook on the next steps
towards a broader usage of such methods is given.
Index Terms—Bayesian deep neural networks, Ensembles,
Test-time augmentation, Calibration, Uncertainty
I. INTRODUCTION
Within the last decade enormous advances on deep neural
networks (DNNs) have been realized, encouraging their adap-
tation in a variety of research ﬁelds, where complex systems
have to be modeled or understood, as for example earth
observation, medical image analysis or robotics. Although
DNNs have become attractive in high risk ﬁelds such as
medical image analysis [1], [2], [3], [4], [5], [6] or autonomous
vehicle control [7], [8], [9], [10], their deployment in mission-
This work is in part supported by the German Federal Ministry of
Education and Research (BMBF) in the framework of the international future
AI lab ”AI4EO – Artiﬁcial Intelligence for Earth Observation: Reasoning,
Uncertainties, Ethics and Beyond” (Grant number: 01DD20001).
and safety-critical real world applications remains limited. The
main factors responsible for this limitation are
• the lack of expressiveness and transparency of a deep neu-
ral network’s inference model, which makes it difﬁcult to
trust their outcomes [2],
• the inability to distinguish between in-domain and out-of-
domain samples [11], [12] and the sensitivity to domain
shifts [13],
• the inability to provide reliable uncertainty estimates for
a deep neural network’s decision [14] and frequently
occurring overconﬁdent predictions [15], [16],
• the sensitivity to adversarial attacks that make deep neural
networks vulnerable for sabotage [17], [18], [19].
These factors are mainly based on an uncertainty already
included in the data (data uncertainty) or a lack of knowledge
of the neural network (model uncertainty). To overcome these
limitations, it is essential to provide uncertainty estimates,
such that uncertain predictions can be ignored or passed to
human experts [20]. Providing uncertainty estimates is not
only important for a safe decision-making in high-risks ﬁelds,
but also crucial in ﬁelds where the data sources are highly
inhomogeneous and labeled data is rare, such as in remote
sensing [21], [22]. Also for ﬁelds where uncertainties form
a crucial part of the learning techniques, such as for active
learning [23], [24], [25], [26] or reinforcement learning [20],
[27], [28], [29], uncertainty estimates are highly important.
In recent years, researchers have shown an increased interest
in estimating uncertainty in DNNs [30], [20], [31], [32],
[33], [34], [35], [36]. The most common way to estimate the
uncertainty on a prediction (the predictive uncertainty) is based
on separately modelling the uncertainty caused by the model
(epistemic or model uncertainty) and the uncertainty caused
by the data (aleatoric or data uncertainty). While the ﬁrst one
is reducible by improving the model which is learned by the
DNN, the latter one is not reducible. The most important ap-
proaches for modeling this separation are Bayesian inference
[30], [20], [37], [9], [38], ensemble approaches [31], [39],
[40], test time data augmentation approaches [41], [42], or
single deterministic networks containing explicit components
to represent the model and the data uncertainty [43], [44],
[45], [32], [46]. Estimating the predictive uncertainty is not
sufﬁcient for safe decision-making. Furthermore, it is crucial
to assure that the uncertainty estimates are reliable. To this end,
the calibration property (the degree of reliability) of DNNs
has been investigated and re-calibration methods have been
arXiv:2107.03342v3  [cs.LG]  18 Jan 2022

2
proposed [15], [47], [48] to obtain reliable (well-calibrated)
uncertainty estimates.
There are several works that give an introduction and
overview of uncertainty in statistical modelling. Ghanem et
al. [49] published a handbook about uncertainty quantiﬁcation,
which includes a detailed and broad description of different
concepts of uncertainty quantiﬁcation, but without explicitly
focusing on the application of neural networks. The theses
of Gal [50] and Kendall [51] contain a good overview about
Bayesian neural networks, especially with focus on the
Monte Carlo (MC) Dropout approach and its application
in computer vision tasks. The thesis of Malinin [52] also
contains a very good introduction and additional insights
into Prior networks. Wang et al. contributed two surveys on
Bayesian deep learning [53], [54]. They introduced a general
framework and the conceptual description of the Bayesian
neural networks (BNNs), followed by an updated presentation
of Bayesian approaches for uncertainty quantiﬁcation in
neural networks with special focus on recommender systems,
topic models, and control. In [55] an evaluation of uncertainty
quantiﬁcation in deep learning is given by presenting and
comparing the uncertainty quantiﬁcation based on the softmax
output, the ensemble of networks, Bayesian neural networks,
and autoencoders on the MNIST data set. Regarding the
practicability of uncertainty quantiﬁcation approaches for real
life mission- and safety-critical applications, Gustafsson et al.
[56] introduced a framework to test the robustness required
in real-world computer vision applications and delivered a
comparison of two popular approaches, namely MC Dropout
and Ensemble methods. H¨ullermeier et al. [57] presented
the concepts of aleatoric and epistemic uncertainty in neural
networks and discussed different concepts to model and
quantify them. In contrast to this, Abdar et al. [58] presented
an overview on uncertainty quantiﬁcation methodologies in
neural networks and provide an extensive list of references for
different application ﬁelds and a discussion of open challenges.
In this work, we present an extensive overview over all
concepts that have to be taken into account when working with
uncertainty in neural networks while keeping the applicability
on real world applications in mind. Our goal is to provide the
reader with a clear thread from the sources of uncertainty to
applications, where uncertainty estimations are needed. Fur-
thermore, we point out the limitations of current approaches
and discuss further challenges to be tackled in the future.
For that, we provide a broad introduction and comparison of
different approaches and fundamental concepts. The survey is
mainly designed for people already familiar with deep learning
concepts and who are planning to incorporate uncertainty
estimation into their predictions. But also for people already
familiar with the topic, this review provides a useful overview
of the whole concept of uncertainty in neural networks and
their applications in different ﬁelds.
In summary, we comprehensively discuss
• Sources and types of uncertainty (Section II),
• Recent studies and approaches for estimating uncertainty
in DNNs (Section III),
• Uncertainty measures and methods for assessing the
quality and impact of uncertainty estimates (Section IV),
• Recent studies and approaches for calibrating DNNs
(Section V),
• An overview over frequently used evaluation data sets,
available benchmarks and implementations1 (Section VI),
• An overview over real-world applications using uncer-
tainty estimates (Section VII),
• A discussion on current challenges and further directions
of research in the future (Section VIII).
In general, the principles and methods for estimating uncer-
tainty and calibrating DNNs can be applied to all regression,
classiﬁcation, and segmentation problems, if not stated differ-
ently. In order to get a deeper dive into explicit applications
of the methods, we refer to the section on applications and to
further readings in the referenced literature.
II. UNCERTAINTY IN DEEP NEURAL NETWORKS
A neural network is a non-linear function fθ parameterized
by model parameters θ (i.e. the network weights) that maps
from a measurable input set X to a measurable output set Y,
i.e.
fθ : X →Y
fθ(x) = y .
(1)
For a supervised setting, we further have a ﬁnite set of training
data D ⊆D = X × Y containing N data samples and
corresponding targets, i.e.
D = (X, Y) = {xn, yn}N
n=1 ⊆D .
(2)
For a new data sample x∗∈X, a neural network trained on
D can be used to predict a corresponding target fθ(x∗) =
y∗. We consider four different steps from the raw information
in the environment to a prediction by a neural network with
quantiﬁed uncertainties, namely
1) the data acquisition process:
The occurrence of some information in the environment
(e.g. a bird’s singing) and a measured observation of this
information (e.g. an audio record).
2) the DNN building process:
The design and training of a neural network.
3) the applied inference model: The model which is applied
for inference (e.g. a Bayesian neural network or an
ensemble of neural networks).
4) the prediction’s uncertainty model: The modelling of the
uncertainties caused by the neural network and by the
data.
In practice, these four steps contain several potential sources of
uncertainty and errors, which again affect the ﬁnal prediction
of a neural network. The ﬁve factors that we think are the
most vital for the cause of uncertainty in a DNN’s predictions
are
1The
list
of
available
implementations
can
be
found
in
Sec-
tion
VI
as
well
as
within
an
additional
GitHub
repository
under
github.com/JakobCode/UncertaintyInNeuralNetworks Resources.

3
• the variability in real world situations,
• the errors inherent to the measurement systems,
• the errors in the architecture speciﬁcation of the DNN,
• the errors in the training procedure of the DNN,
• the errors caused by unknown data.
In the following, the four steps leading from raw infor-
mation to uncertainty quantiﬁcation on a DNN’s prediction
are described in more detail. Within this, we highlight the
sources of uncertainty that are related to the single steps
and explain how the uncertainties are propagated through the
process. Finally, we introduce a model for the uncertainty on
a neural network’s prediction and introduce the main types of
uncertainty considered in neural networks.
The goal of this section is to give an accountable idea of the
uncertainties in neural networks. Hence, for the sake of sim-
plicity we only describe and discuss the mathematical proper-
ties, which are relevant for understanding the approaches and
applying the methodology in different ﬁelds.
A. Data Acquisition
In the context of supervised learning, the data acquisition
describes the process where measurements x and target vari-
ables y are generated in order to represent a (real world)
situation ω from some space Ω. In the real world, a realization
of ω could for example be a bird, x a picture of this bird,
and y a label stating ’bird’. During the measurement, random
noise can occur and information may get lost. We model this
randomness in x by
x|ω ∼px|ω .
(3)
Equivalently, the corresponding target variable y is derived,
where the description is either based on another measurement
or is the result of a labeling process2. For both cases the
description can be affected by noise and errors and we state
it as
y|ω ∼py|ω .
(4)
A neural network is trained on a ﬁnite data set of realizations
of x|ωi and y|ωi based on N real world situations ω1, ..., ωN,
D = {xi, yi}N
i=1 .
(5)
When collecting the training data, two factors can cause
uncertainty in a neural network trained on this data. First, the
sample space Ωshould be sufﬁciently covered by the training
data x1, ..., xN for ω1, ..., ωN. For that, one has to take into
account that for a new sample x∗it in general holds that
x∗̸ = xi for all training situations xi. Following, the target
has to be estimated based on the trained neural network model,
which directly leads to the ﬁrst factor of uncertainty:
2In many cases one can model the labeling process as a mapping from X
to Y, e.g. for speech recognition or various computer vision tasks. For other
tasks, as for example earth observation, this is not always the case. Data is
often labeled based on high resolutional data while low resolutional data is
utilized for the prediction task.
Factor I: Variability in Real World Situations
Most real world environments are highly variable and
almost constantly affected by changes. These changes af-
fect parameters as for example temperature, illumination,
clutter, and physical objects’ size and shape. Changes in
the environment can also affect the expression of objects,
as for example plants after rain look very different to
plants after a drought. When real world situations change
compared to the training set, this is called a distribution
shift. Neural networks are sensitive to distribution shifts,
which can lead to signiﬁcant changes in the performance
of a neural network.
The second case is based on the measurement system, which
has a direct effect on the correlation between the samples and
the corresponding targets. The measurement system generates
information xi and yi that describe ωi but might not contain
enough information to learn a direct mapping from xi to
yi. This means that there might be highly different real
world information ωi and ωj (e.g. city and forest) resulting
in very similar corresponding measurements xi and xj (e.g.
temperature) or similar corresponding targets yi and yj (e.g.
label noise that labels both samples as forest). This directly
leads to our second factor of uncertainty:
Factor II: Error and Noise in Measurement Systems
The measurements themselves can be a source of uncer-
tainty on the neural network’s prediction. This can be
caused by limited information in the measurements, as
for example the image resolution, or by not measuring
false or insufﬁciently available information modalities.
Moreover, it can be caused by noise, for example sensor
noise, by motion, or mechanical stress leading to impre-
cise measures. Furthermore, false labeling is also a source
of uncertainty that can be seen as error and noise in the
measurement system. It is referenced as label noise and
affects the model by reducing the conﬁdence on the true
class prediction during training.
B. Deep Neural Network Design and Training
The design of a DNN covers the explicit modeling of
the neural network and its stochastic training process. The
assumptions on the problem structure induced by the de-
sign and training of the neural network are called inductive
bias [59]. We summarize all decisions of the modeler on
the network’s structure (e.g. the number of parameters, the
layers, the activation functions, etc.) and training process (e.g.
optimization algorithm, regularization, augmentation, etc.) in
a structure conﬁguration s. The deﬁned network structure
gives the third factor of uncertainty in a neural network’s
predictions:
Factor III: Errors in the Model Structure
The structure of a neural network has a direct effect on its
performance and therefore also on the uncertainty of its

4
prediction. For instance, the number of parameters affects
the memorization capacity, which can lead to under- or
over-ﬁtting on the training data. Regarding uncertainty
in neural networks, it is known that deeper networks
tend to be overconﬁdent in their softmax output, meaning
that they predict too much probability on the class with
highest probability score [15].
For a given network structure s and a training data set D,
the training of a neural network is a stochastic process and
therefore the resulting neural network fθ is based on a random
variable,
θ|D, s ∼pθ|D,s.
(6)
The process is stochastic due to random decisions as the order
of the data, random initialization or random regularization
as augmentation or dropout. The loss landscape of a neu-
ral network is highly non-linear and the randomness in the
training process in general leads to different local optima θ∗
resulting in different models [31]. Also, parameters as batch
size, learning rate, and the number of training epochs affect
the training and result in different models. Depending on the
underlying task these models can signiﬁcantly differ in their
predictions for single samples, even leading to a difference in
the overall model performance. This sensitivity to the training
process directly leads to the fourth factor for uncertainties in
neural network predictions:
Factor IV: Errors in the Training Procedure
The training process of a neural network includes many
parameters that have to be deﬁned (batch size, opti-
mizer, learning rate, stopping criteria, regularization, etc.)
and also stochastic decisions within the training process
(batch generation and weight initialization) take place.
All these decisions affect the local optima and it is
therefore very unlikely that two training processes deliver
the same model parameterization. A training data set that
suffers from imbalance or low coverage of single regions
in the data distribution also introduces uncertainties on
the network’s learned parameters, as already described in
the data acquisition. This might be softened by applying
augmentation to increase the variety or by balancing the
impact of single classes or regions on the loss function.
Since the training process is based on the given training data
set D, errors in the data acquisition process (e.g. label noise)
can result in errors in the training process.
C. Inference
The inference describes the prediction of an output y∗for
a new data sample x∗by the neural network. At this time, the
network is trained for a speciﬁc task. Thus, samples which are
not inputs for this task cause errors and are therefore also a
source of uncertainty:
Factor V: Errors Caused by Unknown Data
Especially in classiﬁcation tasks, a neural network that is
trained on samples derived from a world W1 can also be
capable of processing samples derived from a completely
different world W2. This is for example the case, when
a network trained on images of cats and dogs receives a
sample showing a bird. Here, the source of uncertainty
does not lie in the data acquisition process, since we
assume a world to contain only feasible inputs for a
prediction task. Even though the practical result might be
equal to too much noise on a sensor or complete failure
of a sensor, the data considered here represents a valid
sample, but for a different task or domain.
D. Predictive Uncertainty Model
As a modeller, one is mainly interested in the uncertainty
that is propagated onto a prediction y∗, the so-called predictive
uncertainty. Within the data acquisition model, the probability
distribution for a prediction y∗based on some sample x∗is
given by
p(y∗|x∗) =
Z
Ω
p(y∗|ω)p(ω|x∗)dω
(7)
and a maximum a posteriori (MAP) estimation is given by
y∗= arg max
y
p(y|x∗) .
(8)
Since the modeling is based on the unavailable latent variable
ω, one takes an approximative representation based on a
sampled training data set D = {xi, yi}N
i=1 containing N
samples and corresponding targets. The distribution and MAP
estimator in (7) and (8) for a new sample x∗are then predicted
based on the known examples by
p(y∗|x∗) =
Z
D
p(y∗|D, x∗)
(9)
and
y∗= arg max
y
p(y|D, x∗) .
(10)
In general, the distribution given in (9) is unknown and can
only be estimated based on the given data in D. For this
estimation, neural networks form a very powerful tool for
many tasks and applications.
The prediction of a neural network is subject to both model-
dependent and input data-dependent errors, and therefore
the predictive uncertainty associated with y∗is in general
separated into data uncertainty (also statistical or aleatoric
uncertainty [57]) and model uncertainty (also systemic or
epistemic uncertainty [57]). Depending on the underlying
approach, an additional explicit modeling of distributional
uncertainty [32] is used to model the uncertainty, which is
caused by examples from a region not covered by the training
data.
1) Model- and Data Uncertainty: The model uncertainty
covers the uncertainty that is caused by shortcomings in
the model, either by errors in the training procedure, an
insufﬁcient model structure, or lack of knowledge due to
unknown samples or a bad coverage of the training data set.

5
In contrast to this, data uncertainty is related to uncertainty
that directly stems from the data. Data uncertainty is caused
by information loss when representing the real world within
a data sample and represents the distribution stated in (7).
For example, in regression tasks noise in the input and target
measurements causes data uncertainty that the network cannot
learn to correct. In classiﬁcation tasks, samples which do not
contain enough information in order to identify one class with
100% certainty cause data uncertainty on the prediction. The
information loss is a result of the measurement system, e.g.
by representing real world information by image pixels with
a speciﬁc resolution, or by errors in the labelling process.
Considering the ﬁve presented factors for uncertainties on a
neural network’s prediction, model uncertainty covers Factors
I, III, IV, and V and data uncertainty is related to Factor II.
While model uncertainty can be (theoretically) reduced by
improving the architecture, the learning process, or the training
data set, the data uncertainties cannot be explained away [60].
Therefore, DNNs that are capable of handling uncertain inputs
and that are able to remove or quantify the model uncertainty
and give a correct prediction of the data uncertainty are of
paramount importance for a variety of real world mission-
and safety-critical applications.
The Bayesian framework offers a practical tool to reason
about uncertainty in deep learning [61]. In Bayesian modeling,
the model uncertainty is formalized as a probability distribu-
tion over the model parameters θ, while the data uncertainty is
formalized as a probability distribution over the model outputs
y∗, given a parameterized model fθ. The distribution over a
prediction y∗, the predictive distribution, is then given by
p(y∗|x∗, D) =
Z
p(y∗|x∗, θ)
|
{z
}
Data
p(θ|D)
| {z }
Model
dθ .
(11)
The term p(θ|D) is referenced as posterior distribution on the
model parameters and describes the uncertainty on the model
parameters given a training data set D. The posterior distri-
bution is in general not tractable. While ensemble approaches
seek to approximate it by learning several different parameter
settings and averaging over the resulting models [31], Bayesian
inference reformulates it using Bayes Theorem [62]
p(θ|D) = p(D|θ)p(θ)
p(D)
.
(12)
The term p(θ) is called the prior distribution on the model
parameters, since it does not take any information but the
general knowledge on θ into account. The term p(D|θ) rep-
resents the likelihood that the data in D is a realization of
the distribution predicted by a model parameterized with θ.
Many loss functions are motivated by or can be related to the
likelihood function. Loss functions that seek to maximize the
log-likelihood (for an assumed distribution) are for example
the cross-entropy or the mean squared error [63].
Even with the reformulation given in (12), the predictive
distribution given in (11) is still intractable. To overcome
this, several different ways to approximate the predictive
distribution were proposed. A broad overview on the different
concepts and some speciﬁc approaches is presented in Section
III.
2) Distributional
Uncertainty:
Depending
on
the
ap-
proaches that are used to quantify the uncertainty in y∗, the
formulation of the predictive distribution might be further
separated into data, distributional, and model parts [32]:
p(y∗|x∗, D) =
Z Z
p(y|µ)
| {z }
Data
p(µ|x∗, θ)
|
{z
}
Distributional
p(θ|D)
| {z }
Model
dµdθ .
(13)
The distributional part in (13) represents the uncertainty on the
actual network output, e.g. for classiﬁcation tasks this might
be a Dirichlet distribution, which is a distribution over the
categorical distribution given by the softmax output. Modeled
this way, distributional uncertainty refers to uncertainty that
is caused by a change in the input-data distribution, while
model uncertainty refers to uncertainty that is caused by
the process of building and training the DNN. As modeled
in (13), the model uncertainty affects the estimation of the
distributional uncertainty, which affects the estimation of the
data uncertainty.
While most methods presented in this paper only distinguish
between model and data uncertainty, approaches specialized
on out-of-distribution detection often explicitly aim at rep-
resenting the distributional uncertainty [32], [64]. A more
detailed presentation of different approaches for quantifying
uncertainties in neural networks is given in Section III. In
Section IV, different measures for measuring the different
types of uncertainty are presented.
E. Uncertainty Classiﬁcation
On the basis of the input data domain, the predictive
uncertainty can also be classiﬁed into three main classes:
• In-domain uncertainty [65]
In-domain uncertainty represents the uncertainty related
to an input drawn from a data distribution assumed to
be equal to the training data distribution. The in-domain
uncertainty stems from the inability of the deep neural
network to explain an in-domain sample due to lack of
in-domain knowledge. From a modeler point of view, in-
domain uncertainty is caused by design errors (model
uncertainty) and the complexity of the problem at hand
(data uncertainty). Depending on the source of the in-
domain uncertainty, it might be reduced by increasing the
quality of the training data (set) or the training process
[57].
• Domain-shift uncertainty [13]
Domain-shift uncertainty denotes the uncertainty related
to an input drawn from a shifted version of the training
distribution. The distribution shift results from insufﬁcient
coverage by the training data and the variability inherent
to real world situations. A domain-shift might increase
the uncertainty due to the inability of the DNN to explain
the domain shift sample on the basis of the seen samples
at training time. Some errors causing domain shift un-
certainty can be modeled and can therefore be reduced.
For example, occluded samples can be learned by the
deep neural network to reduce domain shift uncertainty
caused by occlusions [66]. However, it is difﬁcult if

6
High data
uncertainty
Low data
uncertainty
Training data
Underlying Data 
Generator
High model
uncertainty
Low model
uncertainty
Model 1
Model 2
Training data
Underlying Data 
Generator
Out of
distribution
Out of
distribution
Model 1
Model 2
Training data
Underlying Data 
Generator
Training data class 1
Training data class 2
Data uncertainty
Training data class 1
Training data class 2
High model
uncertainty
Low model
uncertainty
Model 1
Model 2
Training data class 1
Training data class 2
Out of distribution test
data
Fig. 1: Visualization of the data, the model, and the distributional uncertainty for classiﬁcation and regression models.
not impossible to model all errors causing domain shift
uncertainty, e.g., motion noise [60]. From a modeler point
of view, domain-shift uncertainty is caused by external or
environmental factors but can be reduced by covering the
shifted domain in the training data set.
• Out-of-domain uncertainty [67], [68], [69], [70]
Out-of-domain uncertainty represents the uncertainty re-
lated to an input drawn from the subspace of unknown
data. The distribution of unknown data is different and
far from the training distribution. While a DNN can ex-
tract in-domain knowledge from domain-shift samples, it
cannot extract in-domain knowledge from out-of-domain
samples. For example, when domain-shift uncertainty
describes phenomena like a blurred picture of a dog,
out-of-domain uncertainty describes the case when a
network that learned to classify cats and dogs is asked to
predict a bird. The out-of-domain uncertainty stems from
the inability of the DNN to explain an out-of-domain
sample due to its lack of out-of-domain knowledge. From
a modeler point of view, out-of-domain uncertainty is
caused by input samples, where the network is not meant
to give a prediction for or by insufﬁcient training data.
Since the model uncertainty captures what the DNN does not
know due to lack of in-domain or out-of-domain knowledge,
it captures all, in-domain, domain-shift, and out-of-domain
uncertainties. In contrast, the data uncertainty captures in-
domain uncertainty that is caused by the nature of the data
the network is trained on, as for example overlapping samples
and systematic label noise.
III. UNCERTAINTY ESTIMATION
As described in Section II, several factors may cause model
and data uncertainty and affect a DNN’s prediction. This
variety of sources of uncertainty makes the complete exclusion
of uncertainties in a neural network impossible for almost all
applications. Especially in practical applications employing
real world data, the training data is only a subset of all
possible input data, which means that a miss-match between
the DNN domain and the unknown actual data domain is
often unavoidable. However, an exact representation of the
uncertainty of a DNN prediction is also not possible to
compute, since the different uncertainties can in general not
be modeled accurately and are most often even unknown.
Therefore, methods for estimating uncertainty in a DNN
prediction is a popular and vital ﬁeld of research. The data
uncertainty part is normally represented in the prediction,
e.g. in the softmax output of a classiﬁcation network or in
the explicit prediction of a standard deviation in a regression
network [60]. In contrast to this, several different approaches
which model the model uncertainty and seek to separate it
from the data uncertainty in order to receive an accurate
representation of the data uncertainty were introduced [60],
[32], [31].

7
Factor V
Unknown Data
Factor IV (epistemic)
Errors in the Training Procedure
Factor III (epistemic)
Errors in the Model Strucutre
Factor II (aleatoric)
Error and Noise in the
Measurement System
Factor I (epistemic)
Variability in Real World 
Situations
Raw information
Raw information
Labelled
data
Neural network design
•
Type
•
Depth
•
…
Training process
Inference
Uncertainty
quantification on 
given prediction
Other data
source
Distribution 
shift
Settlement
Settlement
Forest
Forest
Output
Output
Output
Output
Settlement
Forest
Settlement
Forest
Training data distribution
Test data distribution
Measured
data
Measured
data
Fig. 2: The illustration shows the different steps of a neural network pipeline, based on the earth observation example of
land cover classiﬁcation (here settlement and forest) based on optical images. The different factors that affect the predictive
uncertainty are highlighted in the boxes. Factor I is shown as changing environments by cloud covered trees, different types and
colors of trees. Factor II is shown by insufﬁcient measurements, that can not directly be used to separate between settlement
and forest and by label noise. In practice, the resolution of such images can be low and which would also be part of Factor
II. Factor III and Factor IV represent the uncertainties caused by the network structure and the stochastic training process,
respectively. Factor V in contrast is represented by feeding the trained network with unknown types of images, namely cows
and pigs.
In general, the methods for estimating the uncertainty can be
split in four different types based on the number (single or
multiple) and the nature (deterministic or stochastic) of the
used DNNs.
• Single deterministic methods give the prediction based
on one single forward pass within a deterministic net-
work. The uncertainty quantiﬁcation is either derived
by using additional (external) methods or is directly
predicted by the network.
• Bayesian methods cover all kinds of stochastic DNNs,
i.e. DNNs where two forward passes of the same sample
generally lead to different results.
• Ensemble methods combine the predictions of several
different deterministic networks at inference.
• Test-time augmentation methods give the prediction
based on one single deterministic network but augment
the input data at test-time in order to generate several
predictions that are used to evaluate the certainty of the
prediction.
In the following, the main ideas and further extensions of
the four types are presented and their main properties are
discussed. In Figure 3, an overview of the different types
and methods is given. In Figure 4, the different underlying
principles that are used to differentiate between the different
types of methods are presented. Table I summarizes the
main properties of the methods presented in this work, such
as complexity, computational effort, memory consumption,
ﬂexibility, and others.

8
Fig. 3: Visualization of the four different types of uncertainty quantiﬁcation methods presented in this paper.
Neural Network
Uncertainty
Quantiﬁcation
Methods
Test-Time
Augmentation
Methods
Ensemble
Methods
Weight
Sharing
Reduce
Members
Training
Strategies
Bayesian
Methods
Laplace
Approx-
imation
Sampling
Methods
Variational
Inference
Single Network
Deterministic
Methods
Internal
Methods
External
Methods
• Augmentation
Policies25
• Sub-Ensembles24
• Batch-Ensembles23
• Model Pruning21
• Distillation22
• Random Initialization/
Data Shufﬂing18
• Bagging/ Boosting19
• Single Training Run20
• Diagonal Information
Matrix15
• Kronecker-
Factorization16
• Sparse Information
Matrix17
• Original works12
• Stochastic MCMC13
• Theoretic Advances14
• Application of
Variational Inference8
• Stochastic Variational
Inference9
• Normalizing ﬂows10
• Monte-Carlo
Dropout11
• Prior Networks4
• Evidential Neural
Networks5
• Gradient penalties7
• Gradient Metrices1
• Additional Network
for Uncertainty2
• Distance to Training
Data3
1 [71], [72]
2 [46]
3 [36], [35]
4 [32]
5 [44]
7 [35] 8 [73], [74],
9 [75], [30]
10 [76], [77]
11 [20]
12 [78], [79], [80]
13 [81]
14 [82]
15 [83]
16 [63]
17 [84] 18 [31]
19 [85]
20 [86]
21 [87], [88], [89]
22
[90], [45]
23 [39]
24 [40] 25 [91]
A. Single Deterministic Methods
For deterministic neural networks the parameters are de-
terministic and each repetition of a forward pass delivers
the same result. With single deterministic network methods
for uncertainty quantiﬁcation, we summarize all approaches
where the uncertainty on a prediction y∗is computed based
on one single forward pass within a deterministic network.
In the literature, several such approaches can be found. They
can be roughly categorized into approaches where one single
network is explicitly modeled and trained in order to quantify
uncertainties [44], [32], [92], [64], [93] and approaches that
use additional components in order to give an uncertainty
estimate on the prediction of a network [46], [36], [71], [72].
While for the ﬁrst type, the uncertainty quantiﬁcation affects
the training procedure and the predictions of the network, the
latter type is in general applied on already trained networks.
Since trained networks are not modiﬁed by such methods, they
have no effect on the network’s predictions. In the following,
we call these two types internal and external uncertainty
quantiﬁcation approaches.
1) Internal Uncertainty Quantiﬁcation Approaches: Many
of the internal uncertainty quantiﬁcation approaches followed
the idea of predicting the parameters of a distribution over
the predictions instead of a direct pointwise maximum-a-
posteriori estimation. Often, the loss function of such networks
takes the expected divergence between the true distribution
and the predicted distribution into account as e.g., in [32],
[94]. The distribution over the outputs can be interpreted as a
quantiﬁcation of the model uncertainty (see Section II), trying
to emulate the behavior of a Bayesian modeling of the network

9
TABLE I: An overview about the four general methods presented in this paper, namely Bayesian Neural Networks, Ensembles,
Single Deterministic Neural Networks, and Test-Time Data Augmentation. The labels high and low are given relative to the
other approaches and based on the general idea behind them.
Single Deterministic
Networks
Bayesian Methods
Ensemble Methods
Test-Time Data
Augmentation
Description
Approaches that receive an
uncertainty
quantiﬁcation
on
a
prediction
of
a
deterministic
neural
network.
Model parameters are ex-
plicitly modeled as random
variables. For a single for-
ward pass the parameters
are sampled from this distri-
bution. Therefore, the pre-
diction
is
stochastic
and
each prediction is based on
different model weights.
The predictions of several
models are combined into
one prediction. A variety
among the single models is
crucial.
The prediction and uncer-
tainty quantiﬁcation at in-
ference is based on several
predictions resulting from
different augmentations of
the original input sample.
Description of Model
Uncertainties
No
Yes
No
No
Need changes on
existing networks
Depends on method
Yes
Yes (retrain several times)
No
Sensitivity to
initialization and
parameters of training
process
High (in general)
Low
(Usage
of
uninformative
priors possible)
Low
Low
Number of networks
trained
1
1
Several
1
Computational effort
during training
Low
High
High
Low
Memory consumption
during training
Low
Low
High
Low
Number of inputs per
prediction
1
1
1
Several
Forward passes per
prediction
1
Several
Several
Several
Evaluated modes
Single
Single
Multiple
Single
Computational effort
during inference
Low
(One forward pass, possibly
some minor additional ef-
fort for uncertainty quantiﬁ-
cation)
High
(sampling is either needed
for explicit approach or for
the approximation of in-
tractable formulas)
High
(Several models need to be
evaluated)
High
(Several augmentations and
forward
passes
are
per-
formed)
Memory Consumption -
Inference
Low
Low
High
Low
parameters [64]. The prediction is then given as the expected
value of the predicted distribution.
For classiﬁcation tasks, the output in general represents class
probabilities. These probabilities are a result of applying the
softmax function
softmax : RK →
(
z ∈RK|zi ≥0,
K
X
k=1
zk = 1
)
softmax(z)j =
exp(zj)
PK
k=1 exp(zk)
(14)
for multiclass settings and the sigmoid function
sigmoid : R →[0, 1]
sigmoid(z) =
1
1 + exp(−z)
(15)
for binary classiﬁcation tasks on the logits z. These proba-
bilities can be already interpreted as a prediction of the data
uncertainty. However, it is widely discussed that neural net-
works are often over-conﬁdent and the softmax output is often
poorly calibrated, leading to inaccurate uncertainty estimates
[95], [67], [44], [92]. Furthermore, the softmax output cannot
be associated with model uncertainty. But without explicitly
taking the model uncertainty into account, out-of-distribution
samples could lead to outputs that certify a false conﬁdence.
For example, a network trained on cats and dogs will very
likely not result in 50% dog and 50% cat when it is fed with
the image of a bird. This is, because the network extracts
features from the image and even though the features do
not ﬁt to the cat class, they might ﬁt even less to the dog
class. As a result, the network puts more probability on cat.
Furthermore, it was shown that the combination of rectiﬁed
linear unit (ReLu) networks and the softmax output leads to
settings where the network becomes more and more conﬁdent
as the distance between an out-of-distribution sample and the

10
 
 
...
Deterministic
Member 
x*
y1
*
y2
*
y M
*
M
y*
σ *
Mean[ y 1
*, y 2
*,..., yM
* ]
Var[ y1
*, y2
*,..., y M
* ]
Deterministic
Member 1
Deterministic
Member 2
Ensemble Methods
C
Deterministic Network
x*
θ*
y*
σ *
E[Ξ(θ*)]
Var[Ξ(θ*)]
Deterministic 
Methods
A
x*
y*
σ *
Mean[ y 1
*, y 2
*,..., yM
* ] Var[ y1
*, y2
*,..., y M
* ]
Deterministic
Network
x1
*
Augmentation
x2
*
xM
*
...
y1
*
y2
*
y M
*
...
D
Test-Time Data 
Augmentation
...
Forward Pass 
Parameters    
x*
y1
*
y2
*
y M
*
θM
y*
σ*
Mean[ y 1
*, y 2
*,..., yM
* ]
Var[ y1
*, y2
*,..., y M
* ]
Forward Pass 
Parameters     
Forward Pass 
Parameters      
θ1
θ2
Bayesian Neural Networks
B
Fig. 4: A visualization of the basic principles of uncertainty modeling of the four presented general types of uncertainty
prediction in neural networks. For a given input sample x∗each approach delivers a prediction y∗, a representation of model
uncertainty σmodel and a value of data uncertainty σdata. A) single deterministic model, B) Bayesian neural network, B)
ensemble approach, and D) test-time data augmentation. The mean and the standard deviation are only used to keep the
visualization simple. In practice other methods, could be utilized. For the deterministic approaches the idea of predicting the
parameters of an probability distribution Ξ is visualized, other approaches which base on tools additional to the prediction
network are not visualized here.
TABLE II: Overview over the properties of internal and external deterministic single network methods. For a comparison of
single deterministic network approaches with Bayesian, ensemble, and test-time augmentation methods, see Table I.
Internal Methods
External Methods
Description
Estimate
uncertainty
using
one
evaluation of a single network
without external components.
Estimate
uncertainty
using
one
evaluation of the network while
relying on additional external com-
ponents.
Implementation effort
Relatively low, but depends on ex-
plicit approach, often only loss and
network output has to be ﬁxed.
Relatively low, but depends on ex-
plicit approach.
Application on already
trained networks
possible
No
Yes
Separated prediction and
uncertainty estimation
No
Yes
learned training set becomes larger [96]. Figure 5 shows an
example where the rotation of a digit from MNIST leads to
false predictions with high softmax values. This phenomenon
is described and further investigated by Hein et al. [96] who
proposed a method to avoid this behaviour, based on enforcing
a uniform predictive distribution far away from the training
data.
Several other classiﬁcation approaches [44], [32], [94],
[64] followed a similar idea of taking the logit magnitude
into account, but make use of the Dirichlet distribution. The
Dirichlet distribution is the conjugate prior of the categorical
distribution and hence can be interpreted as a distribution
over categorical distributions. The density of the Dirichlet
distribution is deﬁned by
Dir (µ|α) =
Γ(α0)
QK
c=1 Γ(αc)
K
Y
c=1
µαc−1
c
,
αc > 0, α0 =
K
X
c=1
αc
,
where Γ is the gamma function, α1, ..., αK are called the
concentration parameters, and the scalar α0 is the precision
of the distribution. In practice, the concentrations α1, ..., αK
are derived by applying a strictly positive transformation, as
for example the exponential function, to the logit values. As
visualized in Figure 6, a higher concentration value leads to a
sharper Dirichlet distribution.

11
Pred:
Conf:
1
1
1
0.8
3
0.97
7
1
7
0.98
1
0.94
1
1
Pred:
Conf:
3
1
8
0.62
1
1
1
0.84
8
0.99
8
1
8
0.99
Pred:
Conf:
7
1
7
1
7
0.88
1
0.86
5
0.87
6
0.97
6
1
Fig. 5: Predictions received from a LeNet network trained on
MNIST’s handwritten digits from 0 to 9 and evaluated on
different rotations of test samples. One can clearly see, that
for some rotations the network gives a high conﬁdence on the
false class due to confusion (e.g.: 3 is confused with 8) or
representations not seen at training. These examples represent
a simple case of how a basic classiﬁcation network can lead to
overconﬁdent wrong predictions under data distribution shifts.
(a) Low uncertainty
(b) Data uncertainty
(c) Out-of-dist.
Fig. 6: The desired behaviors of a Dirichlet distribution over
categorical distributions. The visualizations show three Dirich-
let distributions over three classes. Each node of the simplex
represents one class. In (a) the sharp Dirichlet distribution
with its expectation close to the upper node represents a
certain prediction of a categorical distribution. In (b) the sharp
Dirichlet distribution in the center of the simplex represents
high data uncertainty but low distributional uncertainty. In
(c) the ﬂat Dirichlet distribution indicates high distributional
uncertainty.
The set of all class probabilities of a categorical distribution
over k classes is equivalent to a k −1-dimensional standard
or probability simplex. Each node of this simplex represents
a probability vector with the full probability mass on one
class and each convex combination of the nodes represents
a categorical distribution with the probability mass distributed
over multiple classes. Malinin et al. [32] argued that a high
model uncertainty should lead to a lower precision value and
therefore to a ﬂat distribution over the whole simplex, since
the network is not familiar with the data. In contrast to this,
data uncertainty should be represented by a sharper but also
centered distribution, since the network can handle the data,
but cannot give a clear class preference. In Figure 6 the dif-
ferent desired behaviors are shown. The Dirichlet distribution
is utilized in several approaches as Dirichlet Prior Networks
[43], [32] and Evidential Neural Networks [97], [44]. Both
of these network types output the parameters of a Dirichlet
distribution from which the categorical distribution describing
the class probabilities can be derived. The general idea of prior
networks [32] is already described above and is visualized
in Figure 6. Prior networks are trained in a multi task way
with the goal of minimizing the expected Kullback-Leibler
(KL) divergence between the predictions of in-distribution
data and a sharp Dirichlet distribution and between a ﬂat
Dirichlet distribution and the predictions of out-of-distribution
data [32]. Besides the main motivation of a better separation
between in-distribution and OOD samples, these approaches
also improve the separation between the conﬁdence of correct
and incorrect predictions, as was shown by [98]. As a follow
up, [94] discussed that for the case that the data uncertainty
is high, the forward deﬁnition of the KL-divergence can lead
to an undesirable multi-model target distribution. In order to
avoid this, they reformulated the loss using the reverse KL-
divergence. The experiments showed improved results in the
uncertainty estimation as well as for the adversarial robustness.
Zhao et al. [99] extended the Dirichlet network approach by
a new loss function that aims at minimizing an upper bound
on the expected error based on the L∞-norm, i.e. optimizing
an expected worst-case upper bound. [34] argued that using
a mixture of Dirichlet distributions gives much more ﬂexi-
bility in approximating the posterior distribution. Therefore,
an approach where the network predicts the parameters for a
mixture of K Dirichlet distributions was suggested. For this,
the network logits represent the parameters for M Dirichlet
distributions and additionally M weights ωi, i = 1, .., M with
the constraint PM
i=1 ωi = 1 are optimized. Nandy et al. [64]
analytically showed that for in-domain samples with high data
uncertainty, the Dirichlet distribution predicted for a false
prediction is often ﬂatter than for a correct prediction. They
argued that this makes it harder to differentiate between in- and
out-of-distribution predictions and suggested a regularization
term towards maximizing the gap between in- and out-of-
distribution samples.
Evidential neural networks [44] also optimize the parame-
terization of a single Dirichlet network. The loss formula-
tion is derived by using subjective logic and interpret the
logits as multinomial opinions or beliefs, as introduced in
Evidence or Dempster-Shafer theory [100]. Evidential neural
networks set the total amount of evidence in relation with
the number of classes and conclude a value of uncertainty
from this, i.e. receiving an additional ”I don’t know class”.
The loss is formulated as expected value of a basic loss,
as for example categorical cross entropy, with respect to a
Dirichlet distribution parameterized by the logits. Additionally,
a regularization term is added, encouraging the network to not
consider features that provide evidence for multiple classes
at the same time, as for example a circle is for 6 and 8.
Due to this, the networks do not differentiate between data
uncertainty and model uncertainty, but learn whether they can
give a certain prediction or not. [33] extended this idea by
differentiating between acuity and dissonance in the collected
evidence in order to better separate in- and out-of-distribution
samples. For that, two explicit data sets containing overlapping
classes and out-of-distribution samples are needed to learn a

12
regularization term. Amini et al. [101] transferred the idea
of evidential neural networks from classiﬁcation tasks to
regression tasks by learning the parameters of an evidential
normal inverse gamma distribution over an underlying Normal
distribution. Charpentier et al. [102] avoided the need of OOD
data for the training process by using normalizing ﬂows to
learn a distribution over a latent space for each class. A new
input sample is projected onto this latent space and a Dirichlet
distribution is parameterized based on the class wise densities
of the received latent point.
Beside the Dirichlet distribution based approaches described
above, several other internal approaches exist. In [68], a
relatively simple approach based on small pertubations on the
training input data and the temperature scaling calibration is
presented leading to an efﬁcient differentiation of in- and out-
of-distritbuion samples. Mo˙zejko et al. [92] made use of the
inhibited softmax function. It contains an artiﬁcial and constant
logit that makes the absolute magnitude of the single logits
more determining in the softmax output. Van Amersfoort et al.
[35] showed that Radial Basis Function (RBF) networks can be
used to achieve competitive results in accuracy and very good
results regarding uncertainty estimation. RBF networks learn
a linear transformation on the logits and classify inputs based
on the distance between the transformed logits and the learned
class centroids. In [35], a scaled exponentiated L2 distance was
used. The data uncertainty can be directly derived from the
distances between the centroids. By including penalties on the
Jacobian matrix in the loss function, the network was trained
to be more sensitive to changes in the input space. As a result,
the method reached good performance on out-of-distribution
detection. In several tests, the approach was compared to a
ﬁve members deep ensemble [31] and it was shown that this
single network approach performs at least equivalently well on
detecting out-of-distribution samples and improves the true-
positive rate.
For regression tasks, Oala et al. [93] introduced an uncertainty
score based on the lower and an upper bound output of an
interval neural network. The interval neural network has the
same structure as the underlying deterministic neural network
and is initialized with the deterministic network’s weights. In
contrast to Gaussian representations of uncertainty given by
a standard deviation, this approach can give non-symmetric
values of uncertainty. Furthermore, the approach is found to be
more robust in the presence of noise. Tagasovska and Lopez-
Paz [103] presented an approach to estimate data and model
uncertainty. A simultaneous quantile regression loss function
was introduced in order to generate well-calibrated prediction
intervals for the data uncertainty. The model uncertainty is
quantiﬁed based on a mapping from the training data to zero,
based on so called Orthonormal Certiﬁcates. The aim was
that out-of-distribution samples, where the model is uncertain,
are mapped to a non-zero value and thus can be recognized.
Kawashima et al. [104] introduced a method which computes
virtual residuals in the training samples of a regression task
based on a cross-validation like pre-training step. With original
training data expanded by the information of these residuals,
the actual predictor is trained to give a prediction and a value
of certainty. The experiments indicated that the virtual residu-
als represent a promising tool in order to avoid overconﬁdent
network predictions.
2) External Uncertainty Quantiﬁcation Approaches:
External uncertainty quantiﬁcation approaches do not affect
the models’ predictions, since the evaluation of the uncertainty
is separated from the underlying prediction task. Furthermore,
several external approaches can be applied to already trained
networks at the same time without affecting each other. Raghu
et al. [46] argued that when both tasks, the prediction and the
uncertainty quantiﬁcation, are done by one single method, the
uncertainty estimation is biased by the actual prediction task.
Therefore, they recommended a ”direct uncertainty prediction”
and suggested to train two neural networks, one for the
actual prediction task and a second one for the prediction of
the uncertainty on the ﬁrst network’s predictions. Similarly,
Ramalho and Miranda [36] introduced an additional neural
network for uncertainty estimation. But in contrast to [46], the
representation space of the training data is considered and the
density around a given test sample is evaluated. The additional
neural network uses this training data density in order to
predict whether the main network’s estimate is expected to be
correct or false. Hsu et al. [105] detected out-of-distribution
examples in classiﬁcation tasks at test-time by predicting
total probabilities for each class, additional to the categorical
distribution given by the softmax output. The class wise total
probability is predicted by applying the sigmoid function to
the network’s logits. Based on these total probabilities, OOD
examples can be identiﬁed as those with low class probabilities
for all classes.
In contrast to this, Oberdiek et al. [71] took the sensitivity of
the model, i.e. the model’s slope, into account by using gradi-
ent metrics for the uncertainty quantiﬁcation in classiﬁcation
tasks. Lee et al. [72] applied a similar idea but made use of
back propagated gradients. In their work they presented state
of the art results on out-of-distribution and corrupted input
detection.
3) Summing Up Single Deterministic Methods: Compared
to many other principles, single deterministic methods are
computational efﬁcient in training and evaluation. For training,
only one network has to be trained and often the approaches
can even be applied on pre-trained networks. Depending on the
actual approach, only a single or at most two forward passes
have to be fulﬁlled for evaluation. The underlying networks
could contain more complex loss functions, which slows down
the training process [44] or external components that have to
be trained and evaluated additionally [46]. But in general, this
is still more efﬁcient than the number of predictions needed for
ensembles based methods (Section III-C), Bayesian methods
(Section III-B), and test-time data augmentation methods (Sec-
tion III-D). A drawback of single deterministic neural network
approaches is the fact that they rely on a single opinion and
can therefore become very sensitive to the underlying network
architecture, training procedure, and the training data.
B. Bayesian Neural Networks
Bayesian Neural Networks (BNNs) [106], [107], [108] have
the ability to combine the scalability, expressiveness, and

13
TABLE III: Overview over the properties different types of Bayesian neural networks approaches. The properties are stated
relatively among the approaches. The properties can not used as comparison to other uncertainty methods as ensembles, single
deterministic models, and test-time augmentation methods. For a comparison of Bayesian methods to these methods see Table
I
Variational Inference
Sampling Approaches
Laplace Approximation
Description
Variational
inference
approaches
approximate
the
(in
general
intractable) posterior distribution
by optimizing over a family of
tractable
distributions.
Achieved
by minimizing the KL divergence.
Representation of the target ran-
dom variable from which realiza-
tions can be sampled. Such meth-
ods are based on Markov Chain
Monte Carlo and further exten-
sions.
Simpliﬁes the target distribution
by approximating the log-posterior
distribution and then, based on
this approximation, deriving a nor-
mal distribution on the network
weights.
Analytic expression
Yes
No
Yes
Can be applied to
pretrained networks
No
No
Yes
Deterministic?
Yes
No
Yes
Unbiased?
No
Yes
No
Optimum
Local optimum
Hard to mix between modes
Local optimum
Convergence
Easy to assess convergence
Hard to assess convergence
Easy to assess convergence
Computational effort at
training time
Medium - Convergence may be
slowed
down
by
regularization.
Additional parameters for uncer-
tainty representation.
High - M forward passes based
on sampled parameters, otherwise
intractable
Low - Training of one deterministic
model and Laplace approximation
Computational effort at
inference
High - M forward passes based
on sampled parameters, otherwise
intractable
High - M forward passes based
on sampled parameters, otherwise
intractable
High - M forward passes based
on sampled parameters, otherwise
intractable
predictive performance of neural networks with the Bayesian
learning as opposed to learning via the maximum likelihood
principles. This is achieved by inferring the probability dis-
tribution over the network parameters θ = (w1, ..., wK).
More speciﬁcally, given a training input-target pair (x, y) the
posterior distribution over the space of parameters p(θ|x, y) is
modelled by assuming a prior distribution over the parameters
p(θ) and applying Bayes theorem:
p(θ|x, y) = p(y|x, θ)p(θ)
p(y|x)
∝p(y|x, θ)p(θ).
(16)
Here, the normalization constant in (16) is called the model
evidence p(y|x) which is deﬁned as
p(y|x) =
Z
p(y|x, θ)p(θ)dθ.
(17)
Once the posterior distribution over the weights have been
estimated, the prediction of an output y∗for a new input data
x∗can be obtained by Bayesian Model Averaging or Full
Bayesian Analysis that involves marginalizing the likelihood
p(y|x, θ) with the posterior distribution:
p(y∗|x∗, x, y) =
Z
p(y∗|x∗, θ)p(θ|x, y)dθ.
(18)
This Bayesian way of prediction is a direct application of the
law of total probability and endows the ability to compute
the principled predictive uncertainty. The integral of (18) is
intractable for the most common prior posterior pairs and
approximation techniques are therefore typically applied. The
most widespread approximation, the Monte Carlo Approxi-
mation, follows the law of large numbers and approximates
the expected value by the mean of N deterministic networks,
fθ1, ..., fθN , parameterized by N samples, θ1, θ2, ..., θN, from
the posterior distribution of the weights, i.e.
y∗
≈
1
N
N
X
i=1
y∗
i
=
1
N
N
X
i=1
fθi(x∗).
(19)
Wilson and Izmailov [16] argue that a key advantage of
BNNs lie in this marginalization step, which particularly can
improve both the accuracy and calibration of modern deep
neural networks. We note that the use-cases of BNNs are not
limited for uncertainty estimation but open up the possibility to
bridge the powerful Bayesian tool-boxes within deep learning.
Notable examples include Bayesian model selection [109],
[110], [111], [112], model compression [76], [113], [114],
active learning [115], [23], [116], continual learning [117],
[118], [119], [120], theoretic advances in Bayesian learning
[121] and beyond.
While the formulation is rather simple, there exist several
challenges. For example, no closed form solution exists for
the posterior inference as conjugate priors do not typically
exist for complex models such as neural networks [62]. Hence,
approximate Bayesian inference techniques are often needed
to compute the posterior probabilities. Yet, directly using
approximate Bayesian inference techniques have been proven
to be difﬁcult as the size of the data and number of parameters
are too large for the use-cases of deep neural networks. In other
words, the integrals of above equations are not computationally
tractable as the size of the data and number of parameters
grows. Moreover, specifying a meaningful prior for deep
neural networks is another challenge that is less understood.

14
In this survey, we classify the BNNs into three different
types based on how the posterior distribution is inferred to
approximate Bayesian inference:
• Variational inference [73], [74]
Variational inference approaches approximate the (in gen-
eral intractable) posterior distribution by optimizing over
a family of tractable distributions.
• Sampling approaches [78]
Sampling approaches deliver a representation of the target
random variable from which realizations can be sampled.
Such methods are based on Markov Chain Monte Carlo
and further extensions.
• Laplace approximation [122], [123]
Laplace approximation simpliﬁes the target distribution
by approximating the log-posterior distribution and then,
based on this approximation, deriving a normal distribu-
tion over the network weights.
While limiting our scope to these three categories, we also
acknowledge several advances in related domains of BNN
research. Some examples are (i) approximate inference
techniques such as alpha divergence [124], [125], [126],
expectation
propagation
[127],
[128],
assumed
density
ﬁltering [129] etc, (ii) probabilistic programming to exploit
modern Graphical Processing Units (GPUs) [130], [131],
[132], [133], (iii) different types of priors [134], [135], (iv)
advancements in theoretical understandings of BNNs [136],
[121], [137], (iv) uncertainty propagation techniques to speed
up the marginalization procedures [138] and (v) computations
of aleatoric uncertainty [139], [140], [141].
1) Variational Inference: The goal of variational inference
is to infer the posterior probabilities p(θ|x, y) using a pre-
speciﬁed family of distributions q(θ). Here, these so-called
variational family q(θ) is deﬁned as a parametric distribution.
An example is the Multivariate Normal distribution where
its parameters are the mean and the covariance matrix. The
main idea of variational inference is to ﬁnd the settings of
these parameters that make q(θ) to be close to the posterior
of interest p(θ|x, y). This measure of closeness between the
probability distributions are given by the Kullback-Leibler
(KL) divergence
KL(q||p) = Eq

log
q(θ)
p(θ|x, y)

.
(20)
Due to the posterior p(θ|x, y) the KL-divergence in (20) can
not be minimized directly. Instead, the evidence lower bound
(ELBO), a function that is equal to the KL divergence up to
a constant, is optimized. For a given prior distribution on the
parameters p(θ), the ELBO is given by
L = Eq

log p(y|x, θ)
q(θ)

(21)
and for the KL divergence
KL(q||p) = −L + log p(y|x)
(22)
holds.
Variational methods for BNNs have been pioneered by
Hinton and Van Camp [73] where the authors derived a
diagonal Gaussian approximation to the posterior distribution
of neural networks (couched in information theory - a
minimum description length). Another notable extension in
1990s has been proposed by Barber and Bishop [74], in
which the full covariance matrix was chosen as the variational
family, and the authors demonstrated how the ELBO can be
optimized for neural networks. Several modern approaches
can be viewed as extensions of these early works [73], [74]
with a focus on how to scale the variational inference to
modern neural networks.
An evident direction with the current methods are the use of
stochastic variational inference (or Monte-Carlo variational
inference), where the optimization of ELBO is performed
using mini-batch of data. One of the ﬁrst connections to
stochastic variational inference has been proposed by Graves
et al. [75] with Gaussian priors. In 2015, Blundell et al.
[30] introduced Bayes By Backprop, a further extension
of stochastic variational inference [75] to non-Gaussian
priors and demonstrated how the stochastic gradients can
be made unbiased. Notable, Kingma et al. [142] introduced
the local reparameterization trick to reduce the variance
of the stochastic gradients. One of the key concepts is
to reformulate the loss function of neural network as the
ELBO. As a result the intractable posterior distribution is
indirectly optimized and variational inference is compatible
to back-propagation with certain modiﬁcations to the training
procedure. These extensions widely focus on the fragility of
stochastic variational inference that arises due to sensitivity
to initialization, prior deﬁnition and variance of the gradients.
These limitations have been addressed recently by Wu et al.
[143], where a hierarchical prior was used and the moments of
the variational distribution are approximated deterministically.
Above works commonly assumed mean-ﬁeld approximations
as the variational family, neglecting the correlations between
the parameters. In order to make more expressive variational
distributions
feasible
for
deep
neural
networks,
several
works proposed to infer using the matrix normal distribution
[144], [145], [146] or more expressive variants [147],
[148] where the covariance matrix is decomposed into the
Kronecker products of smaller matrices or in a low rank
form plus a positive diagonal matrix. A notable contribution
towards expressive posterior distributions has been the use
of normalizing ﬂows [77], [149] - a hierarchical probability
distribution where a sequence of invertible transformations are
applied so that a simple initial density function is transformed
into a more complex distribution. Interestingly, Farquhar et al.
[137] argue that mean-ﬁeld approximation is not a restrictive
assumption, and the layer-wise weight correlations may not
be as important as capturing the depth-wise correlations.
While the claim of Farquhar et al. [137] may remain to be
an open question, the mean-ﬁeld approximations have an
advantage on smaller computational complexities [137]. For
example, Osawa et al. [150] demonstrated that variational
inference can be scaled up to ImageNet size data-sets and
architectures using multiple GPUs and proposed practical
tricks such as data augmentation, momentum initialization

15
and learning rate scheduling.
One of the successes in variational methods have been
accomplished by casting existing stochastic elements of
deep learning as variational inference. A widely known
example is Monte Carlo Dropout (MC Dropout) where the
dropout layers are formulated as Bernoulli distributed random
variables, and training a neural network with dropout layers
can be approximated as performing variational inference
[61], [20], [151]. A main advantage of MC dropout is that
the predictive uncertainty can be computed by activating
dropout not only during training, but also at test time. In this
way, once the neural network is trained with dropout layers,
the implementation efforts can be kept minimum and the
practitioners do not need expert knowledge to reason about
uncertainty - certain criteria that the authors are attributing
to its success [20]. The practical values of this method has
been demonstrated also in several works [152], [10], [21]
and resulted in different extensions (evaluating the usage
of different dropout masks for example for convolutional
layers [153] or by changing the representations of the
predictive uncertainty into model and data uncertainties [60]).
Approaches that build upon the similar idea but randomly
drop incoming activations of a node, instead of dropping an
activation for all following nodes, were also proposed within
the literature [37] and called drop connect. This was found
to be more robust on the uncertainty representation, even
though it was shown that a combination of both can lead to
higher accuracy and robustness in the test predictions [154].
Lastly, connections of variation inference to Adam [155],
RMS Prop [156] and batch normalization [157] have been
further suggested in the literature.
2) Sampling Methods: Sampling methods, or also often
called Monte Carlo methods, are another family of Bayesian
inference algorithms that represent uncertainty without a para-
metric model. Speciﬁcally, sampling methods use a set of
hypotheses (or samples) drawn from the distribution and offer
an advantage that the representation itself is not restricted
by the type of distribution (e.g. can be multi-modal or non-
Gaussian) - hence probability distributions are obtained non-
parametrically. Popular algorithms within this domain are
particle ﬁltering, rejection sampling, importance sampling and
Markov Chain Monte Carlo sampling (MCMC) [62].
In case of neural networks, MCMC is often used since alterna-
tives such as rejection and importance sampling are known to
be inefﬁcient for such high dimensional problems. The main
idea of MCMC is to sample from arbitrary distributions by
transition in state space where this transition is governed by
a record of the current state and the proposal distribution
that aims to estimate the target distribution (e.g. the true
posterior). To explain this, let us start deﬁning the Markov
Chain: a Markov Chain is a distribution over random variables
x1, · · · , xT which follows the state transition rule:
p(x1, · · · , xT ) = p(x1)
T
Y
t=2
p(xt|xt−1),
(23)
i.e. the next state only depends on the current state and not
on any other former state. In order to draw samples from
the true posterior, MCMC sampling methods ﬁrst generate
samples in an iterative and the Markov Chain fashion. Then,
at each iteration, the algorithm decides to either accept or
reject the samples where the probability of acceptance is
determined by certain rules. In this way, as more and more
samples are produced, their values can approximate the desired
distribution.
Hamiltonian Monte Carlo or Hybrid Monte Carlo (HMC)
[158] is an important variant of MCMC sampling method (pi-
oneered by Neals [78], [79], [80], [159] for neural networks),
and is often known to be the gold standards of Bayesian
inference [159], [160], [125]. The algorithm works as follows:
(i) start by initializing a set of parameters θ (either randomly
or in a user-speciﬁc manner). Then, for a given number of total
iterations, (ii) instead of a random walk, a momentum vector
- an auxiliary variable ρ is sampled, and the current value of
parameters θ is updated via the Hamiltonian dynamics:
H(ρ, θ) = −logp(ρ, θ) = −logp(ρ|θ) −logp(θ).
(24)
Deﬁning the potential energy (V (θ) = −logp(θ) and the
kinetic energy T(ρ|θ) = −logp(ρ|θ), the update steps via
Hamilton’s equations are governed by,
dθ
dt = ∂H
∂ρ = ∂T
∂ρ and
(25)
dρ
dt = −∂H
∂θ = −∂T
∂θ −∂V
∂θ .
(26)
The so-called leapfrog integrator is used as a solver [161]. (iii)
For each step, a Metropolis acceptance criterion is applied
to either reject or accept the samples (similar to MCMC).
Unfortunately, HMC requires the processing of the entire
data-set per iteration, which is computationally too expensive
when the data-set size grows to million to even billions.
Hence, many modern algorithms focus on how to perform the
computations in a mini-batch fashion stochastically. In this
context, for the ﬁrst time, Welling and Teh [81] proposed to
combine Stochastic Gradient Descent (SGD) with Langevin
dynamics (a form of MCMC [162], [163], [159]) in order to
obtain a scalable approximation to MCMC algorithm based
on mini-batch SGD [164], [165]. The work demonstrated that
performing Bayesian inference on Deep Neural Networks
can be as simple as running a noisy SGD. This method does
not include the momentum term of HMC via using the ﬁrst
order Langevin dynamics and opened up a new research
area on Stochastic Gradient Markov Chain Monte Carlo
(SG-MCMC).
Consequently, several extensions are available which include
the use of 2nd order information such as preconditioning
and optimizing with the Fisher Information Matrix (FIM)
[166], [167], [168], the Hessian [169], [170], [171], adapting
preconditioning diagonal matrix [172], generating samples
from non-isotropic target densities using Fisher scoring [173],
and samplers in the Riemannian manifold [174] using the
ﬁrst order Langevin dynamics and Levy diffusion noise
and momentum [175]. Within these methods, the so-called
parameter dependent diffusion matrices are incorporated

16
with an intention to offset the stochastic perturbation of
the gradient. To do so, the ”thermostat” ideas [176], [177],
[178] are proposed so that a prescribed constant temperature
distribution is maintained with the parameter dependent noise.
Ahn et al. [179] devised a distributed computing system for
SG-MCMC to exploit the modern computing routines, while
Wang et al. [180] showed that Generative Adversarial Models
(GANs) can be used to distill the samples for improved
memory efﬁciency, instead of distillation for enhancing the
run-time capabilities of computing predictive uncertainty
[181]. Lastly, other recent trends are techniques that reduce
the variance [160], [182] and bias [183], [184] arising from
stochastic gradients.
Concurrently, there have been solid advances in theory of
SG-MCMC methods and their applications in practice. Sato
and Nakagawa [185], for the ﬁrst time, showed that the
SGLD algorithm with constant step size weakly converges;
Chen et al. [186] showed that faster convergence rates
and more accurate invariant measures can be observed for
SG-MCMCs with higher order integrators rather than a
1st order Euler integrator while Teh et al. [187] studied
the consistency and ﬂuctuation properties of the SGLD.
As a result, veriﬁable conditions obeying a central limit
theorem for which the algorithm is consistent, and how its
asymptotic bias-variance decomposition depends on step-size
sequences have been discovered. A more detailed review of
the SG-MCMC with a focus on supporting theoretical results
can be found in Nemeth and Fearnhead [82]. Practically, SG-
MCMC techniques have been applied to shape classiﬁcation
and uncertainty quantiﬁcation [188], empirically study and
validate the effects of tempered posteriors (or called cold-
posteriors) [189] and train a deep neural network in order to
generalize and avoid over-ﬁtting [190], [191].
3) Laplace Approximation: The goal of the Laplace Ap-
proximation is to estimate the posterior distribution over the
parameters of neural networks p(θ | x, y) around a local mode
of the loss surface with a Multivariate Normal distribution.
The Laplace Approximation to the posterior can be obtained
by taking the second-order Taylor series expansion of the log
posterior over the weights around the MAP estimate ˆθ given
some data (x, y). If we assume a Gaussian prior with a scalar
precision value τ > 0, then this corresponds to the commonly
used L2-regularization, and the Taylor series expansion results
in
log p(θ | x, y) ≈log p(ˆθ | x, y)
+ 1
2(θ −ˆθ)T (H + τI)(θ −ˆθ),
where the ﬁrst-order term vanishes because the gradient of the
log posterior δθ = ∇log p(θ | x, y) is zero at the maximum ˆθ.
Taking the exponential on both sides and approximating inte-
grals by reverse engineering densities, the weight posterior is
approximately a Gaussian with the mean ˆθ and the covariance
matrix (H + τI)−1 where H is the Hessian of log p(θ | x, y).
This means that the model uncertainty is represented by the
Hessian H resulting in a Multivariate Normal distribution:
p(θ | x, y) ∼N

ˆθ, (H + τI)−1
.
(27)
In contrast to the two other methods described, the Laplace
approximation can be applied on already trained networks,
and is generally applicable when using standard loss functions
such as MSE or cross entropy and piece-wise linear activations
(e.g RELU). Mackay [123] and Denker et al. [122] have
pioneered the Laplace approximation for neural networks in
1990s, and several modern methods provide an extension to
deep neural networks [192], [193], [63], [84].
The core of the Laplace Approximation is the estimation of
the Hessian. Unfortunately, due to the enormous number of
parameters in modern neural networks, the Hessian matrices
cannot be computed in a feasible way as opposed to relative
smaller networks in Mackay [123] and Denker et al. [122].
Consequently, several different ways for approximating H
have been proposed in the literature. A brief review is as
follows. Instead of diagonal approximations (e.g. [194],
[83]), several researchers have been focusing on including
the off-diagonal elements (e.g. [195], [196] and [197]).
Amongst them, layer-wise Kronecker Factor approximation
of [198], [193], [192] and [199] have demonstrated a notable
scalability [200]. A recent extension can be found in [201]
where the authors propose to re-scale the eigen-values of the
Kronecker factored matrices so that the diagonal variance in
its eigenbasis is accurate. The work presents an interesting
idea as one can prove that in terms of a Frobenius norm, the
proposed approximation is more accurate than that of [193].
However, as this approximation is harmed by inaccurate
estimates of eigenvectors, Lee et al. [84] proposed to further
correct the diagonal elements in the parameter space.
Existing works obtain Laplace Approximation using various
approximation of the Hessian in the line of ﬁdelity-complexity
trade-offs. For several works, an approximation using the
diagonal of the Fisher information matrix or Gauss Newton
matrix, leading to independently distributed model weights,
have been utilized in order to prune weights [202] or perform
continual learning in order to avoid catastrophic forgetting
[203]. In Ritter et al. [63], the Kronecker factorization of
the approximate block-diagonal Hessian [193], [192] have
been applied to obtain scalable Laplace Approximation for
neural networks. With this, the weights among different
layers are still assumed to be independently distributed,
but not the correlations within the same layer. Recently,
building upon the current understandings of neural network’s
loss landscape that many eigenvalues of the Hessian tend
to be zero, [84] developed a low rank approximation that
leads to sparse representations of the layers’ co-variance
matrices. Furthermore, Lee et al. [84] demonstrated that
the Laplace Approximation can be scaled to ImageNet size
data-sets and architectures, and further showed that with the
proposed sparsiﬁcation technique, the memory complexity of
modelling correlations can be made similar to the diagonal
approximation. Lastly, Kristiadi et al. [204] proposed a simple
procedure to compute the last-layer Gaussian approximation
(neglecting the model uncertainty in all other layers of neural

17
networks), and showed that even such a minimalist solution
can mitigate overconﬁdence predictions of ReLU networks.
Recent efforts have extended the Laplace Approximation
beyond the Hessian approximation. To tackle the widely
known assumption that the Laplace Approximation is for the
bell shaped true posterior and thus resulting in under-ﬁtting
behavior [63], Humt et al. [205] proposed to use Bayesian
Optimization and showed that hyperparameters of the Laplace
Approximation can be efﬁciently optimized with increaed
calibration performance. Another work in this domain is by
Kristiadi et al. [206], who proposed uncertainty units - a
new type of hidden units that changes the geometry of the
loss landscape so that more accurate inference is possible.
While Shinde et al. [207] demonstrated practical effectiveness
of the Laplace Approximation to the autonomous driving
applications, Feng et al. [208] showed the possibility to (i)
incorporate contextual information and (ii) domain adaptation
in a semi-supervised manner within the context of image
classiﬁcation. This is achieved by designing unary potentials
within
a
Conditional
Random
Field.
Several
real-time
methods also exist that do not require multiple forward passes
to compute the predictive uncertainty. So-called linearized
Laplace Approximation has been proposed in [209], [210]
using the ideas of Mackay [115] and have been extended with
Laplace bridge for classiﬁcation [211]. Within this framework,
Daxberger et al. [212] proposed inferring the sub-networks
to increase the expressivity of covariance propagation while
remaining computationally tractable.
4) Sum Up Bayesian Methods: Bayesian methods for deep
learning have emerged as a strong research domain by com-
bining principled Bayesian learning for deep neural networks.
A review of current BNNs has been provided with a focus
on mostly, how the posterior p(θ|x, y) is inferred. As an
observation, many of the recent breakthroughs have been
achieved by performing approximate Bayesian inference in a
mini-batch fashion (stochastically) or investigating relatively
simple but scalable techniques such as MC-dropout or Laplace
Approximation. As a result, several works demonstrated that
the posterior inference in large scale settings are now pos-
sible [213], [150], [84], and the ﬁeld has several practical
approximation tools to compute more expressive and accurate
posteriors since the revival of BNNs beyond the pioneers [73],
[74], [78], [122], [123]. There are also emerging challenges
on new frontiers beyond accurate inference techniques. Some
examples are: (i) how to specify meaningful priors? [134],
[135], (ii) how to efﬁciently marginalize over the parame-
ters for fast predictive uncertainty? [181], [138], [211] (iii)
infrastructures such as new benchmarks, evaluation protocols
and software tools [214], [131], [132], [215], and (iv) towards
better understandings on the current methodologies and their
potential applications [137], [189], [216], [208].
C. Ensemble Methods
1) Principles of Ensemble Methods: Ensembles derive a
prediction based on the predictions received from multiple so-
called ensemble members. They target at a better generaliza-
tion by making use of synergy effects among the different
models, arguing that a group of decision makers tend to make
better decisions than a single decision maker [217], [218]. For
an ensemble f : X →Y with members fi : X →Y for
i ∈1, 2, ..., M, this could be for example implemented by
simply averaging over the members’ predictions,
f(x) := 1
M
M
X
i=1
fi(x) .
Based on this intuitive idea, several works applying ensemble
methods to different kinds of practical tasks and approaches,
as for example bioinformatics [219], [220], [221], remote
sensing
[222],
[223],
[224],
or
reinforcement
learning
[225], [226] can be found in the literature. Besides the
improvement in the accuracy, ensembles give an intuitive
way of representing the model uncertainty on a prediction by
evaluating the variety among the member’s predictions.
Compared to Bayesian and single deterministic network
approaches, ensemble methods have two major differences.
First, the general idea behind ensembles is relatively clear
and there are not many groundbreaking differences in the
application of different types of ensemble methods and
their application in different ﬁelds. Hence, this section
focuses on different strategies to train an ensemble and some
variations that target on making ensemble methods more
efﬁcient. Second, ensemble methods were originally not
introduced to explicitly handle and quantify uncertainties
in neural networks. Although the derivation of uncertainty
from ensemble predictions is obvious, since they actually
aim at reducing the model uncertainty, ensembles were ﬁrst
introduced and discussed in order to improve the accuracy
on a prediction [218]. Therefore, many works on ensemble
methods do not explicitly take the uncertainty into account.
Notwithstanding this, ensembles have been found to be well
suited for uncertainty estimations in neural networks [31].
2) Single- and Multi-Mode Evaluation: One main point
where ensemble methods differ from the other methods
presented in this paper is the number of local optima that
are considered, i.e. the differentiation into single-mode and
multi-mode evaluation.
In order to create synergies and marginalise false predictions
of single members, the members of an ensemble have to
behave differently in case of an uncertain outcome. The
mapping deﬁned by a neural network is highly non-linear
and hence the optimized loss function contains many local
optima to which a training algorithm could converge to.
Deterministic neural networks converge to one single local
optimum in the solution space [227]. Other approaches, e.g.
BNNs, still converge to one single optimum, but additionally
take the uncertainty on this local optimum into account
[227]. This means, that neighbouring points within a certain
region around the solution also affect the loss and also
inﬂuence the prediction of a test sample. Since these methods
focus on single regions, the evaluation is called single-mode
evaluation. In contrast to this, ensemble methods consist of
several networks, which should converge to different local
optima. This leads to a so called multi-mode evaluation [227].

18
Space of model parameters
Loss value
Parameters considered for training and inference
 
  Deterministic neural network
 
  Bayesian neural network
 
  Ensemble of neural networks
 
 
Training
Inference
Fig. 7: A visualization of the different evaluation behaviours
of deterministic neural networks, Bayesian neural networks
and the ensemble of deterministic neural networks. The x-axis
indicates the network parameters θ and the y-axis represents
the loss value. While the deterministic network learns the
parameters based on a pointwise estimation, the Bayesian
neural network also takes the surrounding of the single point
into account. The ensemble of deterministic methods optimizes
pointwise but learns several different parameter settings.
In Figure 7, the considered parameters of a single-mode
deterministic,
single-mode
probabilistic
(Bayesian)
and
multi-mode ensemble approach are visualized. The goal of
multi-mode evaluation is that different local optima could
lead to models with different strengths and weaknesses in the
predictions such that a combination of several such models
brings synergy effects improving the overall performance.
3) Bringing Variety into Ensembles:
One of the most
crucial points when applying ensemble methods is to maxi-
mize the variety in the behaviour among the single networks
[228], [31]. In order to increase the variety, several different
approaches can be applied:
• Random Initialization and Data Shufﬂe
Due to the very non-linear loss landscape, different ini-
tializations of a neural network lead in general to different
training results. Since the training is realized on mini-
batches, the order of the training data points also affects
the ﬁnal result.
• Bagging and Boosting
Bagging (Bootstrap aggregating) and Boosting are two
strategies that vary the distribution of the used training
data sets by sampling new sets of training samples from
the original set. Bagging is sampling from the training
data uniformly and with replacement [62]. Thanks to
the replacement process, ensemble members can see
single samples several times in the training set while
missing some other training samples. For boosting, the
members are trained one after another and the probability
of sampling a sample for the next training set is based
on the performance of the already trained ensemble [62].
• Data Augmentation
Augmenting the input data randomly for each ensemble
member leads to models trained on different data points
and therefore in general to a larger variety among the
different members.
• Ensemble of different Network Architecture
The combination of different network architectures leads
to different loss landscapes and can therefore also in-
crease the diversity in the resulting predictions [229].
In several works, it has been shown that the variety induced by
random initialization works sufﬁciently and that bagging could
even lead to a weaker performance [230], [31]. Livieris et
al. [231] evaluated different bagging and boosting strategies
for
ensembles
of
weight
constrained
neural
networks.
Interestingly, it is found that bagging performs better for a
small number of ensemble members while boosting performs
better for a large number. Nanni et al. [232] evaluated
ensembles based on different types of image augmentation
for bioimage classiﬁcation tasks and compared those to each
other. Guo and Gould [233] used augmentation methods
within in an ensemble approach for object detection. Both
works stated that the ensemble approach using augmentations
improves the resulting accuracy. In contrast to this, [234],
[235] stated with respect to uncertainty quantiﬁcation that
image augmentation can harm the calibration of an ensemble
and post-processing calibration methods have to be slightly
adapted when using ensemble methods. Other ways of
inducing variety for speciﬁc tasks have been also introduced.
For instance, in [236], the members are trained with different
attention masks in order to focus on different parts of the
input data. Other approaches focused on the training process
and introduced learning rate schedulers that are designed to
discover several local optima within one training process
[86], [237]. Following, an ensemble can be built based on
local optima found within one single training run. It is
important to note that if not explicitly stated, the works and
approaches presented so far targeted on improvements in the
predictive accuracy and did not explicitly consider uncertainty
quantiﬁcation.
4) Ensemble Methods and Uncertainty Quantiﬁcation:
Besides the improvement in the accuracy, ensembles are
widely used for modelling uncertainty on predictions of
complex models, as for example in climate prediction
[238], [239]. Accordingly, ensembles are also used for
quantifying the uncertainty on a deep neural network’s
prediction, and over the last years they became more and
more popular for such tasks [31], [228]. Lakshminarayanan
et al. [31] are often referenced as a base work on uncertainty
estimations derived from ensembles of neural networks and
as a reference for the competitiveness of deep ensembles.
They introduced an ensemble training pipeline to quantify
predictive uncertainty within DNNs. In order to handle data
and model uncertainty, the member networks are designed
with two heads, representing the prediction and a predicted
value of data uncertainty on the prediction. The approach

19
is evaluated with respect to accuracy, calibration, and out-
of-distribution detection for classiﬁcation and regression
tasks. In all tests, the method performs at least equally
well as the BNN approaches used for comparison, namely
Monte Carlo Dropout and Probabilistic Backpropagation.
Lakshminarayanan et al. [31] also showed that shufﬂing the
training data and a random initialization of the training process
induces a sufﬁcient variety in the models in order to predict
the uncertainty for the given architectures and data sets.
Furthermore, bagging is even found to worsen the predictive
uncertainty estimation, extending the ﬁndings of Lee et al.
[230], who found bagging to worsen the predictive accuracy
of ensemble methods on the investigated tasks. Gustafsson
et al. [56] introduced a framework for the comparison of
uncertainty quantiﬁcation methods with a speciﬁc focus on
real life applications. Based on this framework, they compared
ensembles and Monte Carlo dropout and found ensembles
to be more reliable and applicable to real life applications.
These ﬁndings endorse the results reported by Beluch et al.
[240] who found ensemble methods to deliver more accurate
and better calibrated predictions on active learning tasks
than Monte Carlo Dropout. Ovadia et al. [13] evaluated
different uncertainty quantiﬁcation methods based on test
sets affected by distribution shifts. The excessive evaluation
contains a variety of model types and data modalities. As
a take away, the authors stated that already for a relatively
small ensemble size of ﬁve, deep ensembles seem to perform
best and are more robust to data set shifts than the compared
methods. Vyas et al. [241] presented an ensemble method
for the improved detection of out-of-distribution samples. For
each member, a subset of the training data is considered as
out-of-distribution. For the training process, a loss, seeking a
minimum margin greater zero between the average entropy
of the in-domain and the out-of-distribution subsets is
introduced and leads to a signiﬁcant improvement in the
out-of-distribution detection.
5) Making Ensemble Methods more Efﬁcient: Compared to
single model methods, ensemble methods come along with
a signiﬁcantly increased computational effort and memory
consumption [217], [45]. When deploying an ensemble for a
real life application the available memory and computational
power are often limited. Such limitations could easily become
a bottleneck [242] and could become critical for applications
with limited reaction time. Reducing the number of models
leads to less memory and computational power consumption.
Pruning approaches reduce the complexity of ensembles by
pruning over the members and reducing the redundancy among
them. For that, several approaches based on different diversity
measures are developed to remove single members without
strongly affecting the performance [88], [87], [243].
Distillation is another approach where the number of
networks is reduced to one single model. It is the procedure
of teaching a single network to represent the knowledge
of a group of neural networks [244]. First works on the
distillation of neural networks were motivated by restrictions
when deploying large scale classiﬁcation problems [244].
The original classiﬁcation problem is separated into several
sub-problems focusing on single blocks of classes that are
difﬁcult to differentiate. Several smaller trainer networks
are trained on the sub-problems and then teach one student
network to separate all classes at the same time. In contrast to
this, Ensemble distillation approaches capture the behaviour
of an ensemble by one single network. First works on
ensemble distillation used the average of the softmax outputs
of the ensemble members in order to teach a student network
the derived predictive uncertainty [245]. Englesson and
Azizpour [246] justify the resulting predictive distributions
of this approach and additionally cover the handling of out-
of-distribution samples. When averaging over the members’
outputs, the model uncertainty, which is represented in the
variety of ensemble outputs, gets lost. To overcome this
drawback, researchers applied the idea of learning higher
order distributions, i.e. distributions over a distribution,
instead of directly predicting the output [90], [45]. The
members are then distillated based on the divergence from
the average distribution. The idea is closely related to the
prior networks [32] and the evidential neural networks
[44], which are described in Section III-A. [45] modelled
ensemble members and the distilled network as prior networks
predicting the parameters of a Dirichlet distribution. The
distillation then seeks to minimize the KL divergence between
the averaged Dirichlet distributions of the ensemble members
and the output of the distilled network. Lindqvist et al.
[90] generalized this idea to any other parameterizable
distribution. With that, the method is also applicable to
regression problems, for example by predicting a mean and
standard deviation to describe a normal distribution. Within
several tests, the distillation models generated by these
approaches are able to distinguish between data uncertainty
and model uncertainty. Although distillation methods cannot
completely capture the behaviour of an underlying ensemble,
it has been shown that they are capable of delivering good
and for some experiments even comparable results [90], [45],
[247].
Other approaches, as sub-ensembles [39] and batch-ensembles
[40] seek to reduce the computation effort and memory
consumption by sharing parts among the single members.
It is important to note that the possibility of using different
model architectures for the ensemble members could get lost
when parts of the ensembles are shared. Also, the training
of the models cannot be run in a completely independent
manner. Therefore, the actual time needed for training does
not necessarily decrease in the same way as the computational
effort does.
Sub-ensembles [39] divide a neural network architecture
into two sub-networks. The trunk network for the extraction
of general information from the input data, and the task
network that uses these information to fulﬁll the actual task.
In order to train a sub-ensemble, ﬁrst, the weights of each
member’s trunk network are ﬁxed based on the resulting
parameters of one single model’s training process. Following,
the parameters of each ensemble members’ task network are
trained independently from the other members. As a result,
the members are built with a common trunk and an individual
task sub-network. Since the training and the evaluation of

20
the trunk network have to be done only once, the number of
computations needed for training and testing decreases by the
factor M·Ntask+Ntrunk
M·N
, where Ntask, Ntrunk, and N stand for the
number of variables in the task networks, the trunk network,
and the complete network. Valdenegro-Toro [39] further
underlined the usage of a shared trunk network by arguing
that the trunk network is in general computational more costly
than the task network. In contrast to this, batch-ensembles
[40] connect the member networks with each other at every
layer. The ensemble members’ weights are described as a
Hadamard product of one shared weight matrix W ∈Rn×m
and M individual rank one matrices Fi ∈Rn×m, each linked
with one of the M ensemble members. The rank one matrices
can be written as a multiplication Fi = risT
i of two vectors
s ∈Rn and r ∈Rm and hence the matrix Fi can be described
by n + m parameters. With this approach, each additional
ensemble member increases the number of parameters only
by the factor
n+m
M·(n+m)+n·m + 1 instead of M+1
M
= 1 +
1
M .
On the one hand, with this approach, the members are not
independent anymore such that all the members have to
be trained in parallel. On the other hand, the authors also
showed that the parallelization can be realized similar to the
optimization on mini-batches and on a single unit.
6) Sum Up Ensemble Methods: Ensemble methods are
very easy to apply, since no complex implementation or
major modiﬁcation of the standard deterministic model have
to be realized. Furthermore, ensemble members are trained
independently from each other, which makes the training
easily parallelizable. Also, trained ensembles can be extended
easily, but the needed memory and the computational effort
increases linearly with the number of members for training and
evaluation. The main challenge when working with ensemble
methods is the need of introducing diversity among the ensem-
ble members. For accuracy, uncertainty quantiﬁcation, and out-
of-distribution detection, random initialization, data shufﬂing,
and augmentations have been found to be sufﬁcient for many
applications and tasks [31], [232]. Since these methods may be
applied anyway, they do not need much additional effort. The
independence of the single ensemble members leads to a linear
increase in the required memory and computation power with
each additional member. This holds for the training as well as
for testing. This limits the deployment of ensemble methods
in many practical applications where the computation power
or memory is limited, the application is time-critical, or very
large networks with high inference time are included [45].
Many aspects of ensemble approaches are only investigated
with respect to the performance on the predictive accuracy
but do not take predictive uncertainty into account. This also
holds for the comparison of different training strategies for
a broad range of problems and data sets. Especially since
the overconﬁdence from single members can be transferred
to the whole ensemble, strategies that encourage the members
to deliver different false predictions instead of all delivering
the same false prediction should be further investigated. For a
better understanding of ensemble behavior, further evaluations
of the loss landscape, as done by Fort et al. [227], could offer
interesting insights.
D. Test Time Augmentation
Inspired by ensemble methods and adversarial examples
[14], the test time data augmentation is one of the simpler
predictive uncertainty estimation techniques. The basic method
is to create multiple test samples from each test sample by
applying data augmentation techniques on it and then test all
those samples to compute a predictive distribution in order
to measure uncertainty. The idea behind this method is that
the augmented test samples allow the exploration of different
views and is therefore capable of capturing the uncertainty.
Mostly, this technique of test time data augmentations has been
used in medical image processing [248], [249], [14], [250].
One of the reasons for this is that the ﬁeld of medical image
processing already makes heavy use of data augmentations
while using deep learning [251], so it is quite easy to just
apply those same augmentations during test time to calculate
the uncertainties. Another reason is that collecting medical
images is costly, thus forcing practitioners to rely on data
augmentation techniques. Moshkov et al. [250] used the test
time augmentation technique for cell segmentation tasks. For
that, they created multiple variations of the test data before
feeding it to a trained UNet or Mask R-CNN architecture.
Following, they used a majority voting to create the ﬁnal
output segmentation mask and discuss the policies of applying
different augmentation techniques and how they affect the ﬁnal
predictive results of the deep networks.
Overall, test time augmentation is an easy method for estimat-
ing uncertainties because it keeps the underlying model un-
changed, requires no additional data, and is simple to put into
practice with off-the-shelf libraries. Nonetheless, it needs to be
kept in mind that during applying this technique, one should
only apply valid augmentations to the data, meaning that the
augmentations should not generate data from outside the target
distribution. According to [252], test time augmentation can
change many correct predictions into incorrect predictions (and
vice versa) due to many factors such as the nature of the
problem at hand, the size of training data, the deep neural
network architecture, and the type of augmentation. To limit
the impact of these factors, Shanmugam et al. [252] proposed
a learning-based method for test time augmentation that takes
these factors into consideration. In particular, the proposed
method learns a function that aggregates the predictions
from each augmentation of a test sample. Similar to [252],
Molchanov et al. [91] proposed a method, named “greedy
Policy Search”, for constructing a test-time augmentation
policy by choosing augmentations to be include in a ﬁxed-
length policy. Similarly, Kim et al. [253] proposed a method
for learning a loss predictor from the training data for instance-
aware test-time augmentation selection. The predictor selects
test-time augmentations with the lowest predicted loss for a
given sample.
Although learnable test time augmentation techniques [252],
[91], [253] help to select valid augmentations, one of the
major open question is to ﬁnd out the effect on uncertainty
due to different kinds of augmentations. It can for example
happen that a simple augmentation like reﬂection is not
able to capture much of the uncertainty while some domain

21
specialized stretching and shearing captures more uncertainty.
It is also important to ﬁnd out how many augmentations are
needed to correctly quantify uncertainties in a given task. This
is particularly important in applications like earth observation,
where inference might be needed on global scale with limited
resources.
E. Neural Network Uncertainty Quantiﬁcation Approaches for
Real Life Applications
In order to use the presented methods on real life tasks,
several different considerations have to be taken into account.
The memory and computational power is often restricted
while many real world tasks my be time-critical [242]. An
overview over the main properties is given in Table I.
The presented applications all come along with advantages
and disadvantages, depending on the properties a user
is interested in. While ensemble methods and test-time
augmentation methods are relatively easy to apply, Bayesian
approaches deliver a clear description of the uncertainty on
the models parameters and also deliver a deeper theoretical
basis. The computational effort and memory consumption
is a common restriction on real life applications, where
single deterministic network approaches perform best, but
distillation of ensembles or efﬁcient Bayesian methods can
also be taken into consideration. Within the different types
of Bayesian approaches, the performance, the computational
effort, and the implementation effort still vary strongly.
Laplace approximations are relatively easy to apply and
compared to sampling approaches much less computational
effort is needed. Furthermore, there often already exist
pretrained networks for an application. In this case, Laplace
Approximation and external deterministic single network
approaches can in general be applied to already trained
networks.
Another important aspect that has to be taken into account
for uncertainty quantiﬁcation in real life applications is the
source and type of uncertainty. For real life applications,
out-of-distribution detection forms the maybe most important
challenge in order to avoid unexpected decisions of the
network and to be aware of adversarial attacks. Especially
since many motivations of uncertainty quantiﬁcation are
given
by
risk
minimization,
methods
that
deliver
risk
averse predictions are an important ﬁeld to evaluate. Many
works already demonstrated the capability of detecting
out-of-distribution samples on several tasks and built a
strong fundamental tool set for the deployment in real life
applications [254], [241], [255], [56]. However, in real
life, the tasks are much more difﬁcult than ﬁnding out-of-
distribution samples among data sets (e.g., MNIST or CIFAR
data sets etc.) and the main challenge lies in comparing
such approaches on several real-world data sets against
each other. The work of Gustafsson et al. [56] forms a ﬁrst
important step towards an evaluation of methods that better
suits the demands in real life applications. Interestingly, they
found for their tests ensembles to outperform the considered
Bayesian approaches. This indicates, that the multi-mode
evaluation given by ensembles is a powerful property for
real life applications. Nevertheless Bayesian approaches have
delivered strong results as well and furthermore come along
with a strong theoretical foundation [84], [211], [6], [23]. As
a way to go, the combination of efﬁcient ensemble strategies
and Bayesian approaches could combine the variability in
the model parameters while still considering several modes
for a prediction. Also, single deterministic approaches as
the prior networks [32], [64], [44], [33] deliver comparable
results while consuming signiﬁcantly less computation power.
However, this efﬁciency often comes along with the problem
that separated sets of in- and out-of-distribution samples have
to be available for the training process [33], [64]. In general,
the development of new problem and loss formulations as
for example given in [64] leads to a better understanding and
description of the underlying problem and forms an important
ﬁeld of research.
IV. UNCERTAINTY MEASURES AND QUALITY
In Section III, we presented different methods for modeling
and predicting different types of uncertainty in neural net-
works. In order to evaluate these approaches, measures have
to be applied on the derived uncertainties. In the following,
we present different measures for quantifying the different
predicted types of uncertainty. In general, the correctness
and trustworthiness of these uncertainties is not automatically
given. In fact, there are several reasons why evaluating the
quality of the uncertainty estimates is a challenging task.
• First, the quality of the uncertainty estimation depends on
the underlying method for estimating uncertainty. This is
exempliﬁed in the work undertaken by Yao et al. [256],
which shows that different approximates of Bayesian
inference (e.g. Gaussian and Laplace approximates) result
in different qualities of uncertainty estimates.
• Second, there is a lack of ground truth uncertainty
estimates [31] and deﬁning ground truth uncertainty
estimates is challenging. For instance, if we deﬁne the
ground truth uncertainty as the uncertainty across human
subjects, we still have to answer questions as ”How many
subjects do we need?” or ”How to choose the subjects?”.
• Third, there is a lack of a uniﬁed quantitative evaluation
metric [257]. To be more speciﬁc, the uncertainty is
deﬁned differently in different machine learning tasks
such as classiﬁcation, segmentation, and regression. For
instance, prediction intervals or standard deviations are
used to represent uncertainty in regression tasks, while
entropy (and other related measures) are used to capture
uncertainty in classiﬁcation and segmentation tasks.
A. Evaluating Uncertainty in Classiﬁcation Tasks
For classiﬁcation tasks, the network’s softmax output al-
ready represents a measure of conﬁdence. But since the
raw softmax output is neither very reliable [67] nor can it
represent all sources of uncertainty [19], further approaches
and corresponding measures were developed.

22
1) Measuring Data Uncertainty in Classiﬁcation Tasks:
Consider a classiﬁcation task with K different classes and
a probability vector network output p(x) for some input
sample x. In the following p is used for simpliﬁcation and
pk stands for the k-th entry in the vector. In general, the
given prediction p represents a categorical distribution, i.e. it
assigns a probability to each class to be the correct prediction.
Since the prediction is not given as an explicit class but
as a probability distribution, (un)certainty estimates can be
directly derived from the prediction. In general this pointwise
prediction can be seen as estimated data uncertainty [60].
However, as discussed in Section II, the model’s estimation of
the data uncertainty is affected by model uncertainty, which
has to be taken into account separately. In order to evaluate
the amount of predicted data uncertainty, one can for example
apply the maximal class probability or the entropy measures:
Maximal probability:
pmax = max {pk}K
k=1
(28)
Entropy:
H(p) = −
K
X
k=1
pk log2(pk)
(29)
The maximal probability represents a direct representation
of certainty, while entropy describes the average level of
information in a random variable. Even though a softmax
output should represent the data uncertainty, one cannot tell
from a single prediction how large the amount of model
uncertainty is that affects this speciﬁc prediction as well.
2) Measuring Model Uncertainty in Classiﬁcation Tasks:
As already discussed in Section III, a single softmax prediction
is not a very reliable way for uncertainty quantiﬁcation since
it is often badly calibrated [19] and does not have any infor-
mation about the certainty the model itself has on this speciﬁc
output [19]. An (approximated) posterior distribution p(θ|D)
on the learned model parameters can help to receive better
uncertainty estimates. With such a posterior distribution, the
softmax output itself becomes a random variable and one can
evaluate its variation, i.e. uncertainty. For simplicity, we denote
p(y|θ, x) also as p and it will be clear from context whether p
depends on θ or not. The most common measures for this are
the mutual information (MI), the expected Kullback-Leibler
Divergence (EKL), and the predictive variance. Basically, all
these measures compute the expected divergence between the
(stochastic) softmax output and the expected softmax output
ˆp = Eθ∼p(θ|D) [p(y|x, θ] .
(30)
The MI uses the entropy to measure the mutual dependence
between two variables. In the described case, the difference
between the information given in the expected softmax output
and the expected information in the softmax output is com-
pared, i.e.
MI (θ, y|x, D) = H [ˆp] −Eθ∼p(θ|D)H [p(y|x, θ)] .
(31)
Smith and Gal [19] pointed out that the MI is minimal when
the knowledge about model parameters does not increase the
information in the ﬁnal prediction. Therefore, the MI can be
interpreted as a measure of model uncertainty.
The Kullback-Leibler divergence measures the divergence
between two given probability distributions. The EKL can be
used to measure the (expected) divergence among the possible
softmax outputs,
Eθ∼p(θ|D) [KL(ˆp || p)] = Eθ∼p(θ|D)
" K
X
i=1
ˆpi log
 ˆpi
pi
#
,
(32)
which can also be interpreted as a measure of uncertainty
on the model’s output and therefore represents the model
uncertainty.
The predictive variance evaluates the variance on the (random)
softmax outpus, i.e.
σ(p) = Eθ∼p(θ|D)
h
(p −ˆp)2i
.
(33)
As described in Section III, an analytically described pos-
terior distribution p(θ|D) is only given for a subset of the
Bayesian methods. And even for an analytically described
distribution, the propagation of the parameter uncertainty into
the prediction is in almost all cases intractable and has to
be approximated for example with Monte Carlo approxima-
tion. Similarly, ensemble methods collect predictions from M
neural networks, and test-time data augmentation approaches
receive M predictions from M different augmentations applied
to the original input sample. For all these cases, we receive a
set of M samples,

pi	M
i=1, which can be used to approximate
the intractable or even undeﬁned underlying distribution. With
these approximations, the measures deﬁned in (31), (32), and
(33) can be applied straight forward and only the expectation
has to be replaced by average sums. For example, the expected
softmax output becomes
ˆp ≈1
M
M
X
i=1
pi .
For the expectations given in (31), (32), and (33), the expec-
tation is approximated similarly.
3) Measuring Distributional Uncertainty in Classiﬁcation
Tasks:
Although these uncertainty measures are widely used to cap-
ture the variability among several predictions derived from
Bayesian neural networks [60], ensemble methods [31], or
test-time data augmentation methods [14], they cannot capture
distributional shifts in the input data or out-of-distribution
examples, which could lead to a biased inference process and
a falsely stated conﬁdence. If all predictors attribute a high
probability mass to the same (false) class label, this induces a
low variability among the estimates. Hence, the network seams
to be certain about its prediction, while the uncertainty in the
prediction itself (given by the softmax probabilities) is also
evaluated to be low. To tackle this issue, several approaches
described in Section III take the magnitude of the logits into
account, since a larger logit indicates larger evidence for the
corresponding class [44]. Thus, the methods either interpret the
total sum of the (exponentials of) the logits as precision value
of a Dirichlet distribution (see description of Dirichlet Priors
in Section III-A) [32], [94], [64], or as a collection of evidence
that is compared to a deﬁned constant [44], [92]. One can also

23
derive a total class probability for each class individually by
applying the sigmoid function to each logit [105]. Based on
the class-wise total probabilities, OOD samples might easier
be detected, since all classes can have low probability at the
same time. Other methods deliver an explicit measure how
well new data samples suit into the training data distribution.
Based on this, they also give a measure that a sample will be
predicted correctly [36].
4) Performance Measure on Complete Data Set:
While the measures described above measure the performance
of individual predictions, others evaluate the usage of these
measures on a set of samples. Measures of uncertainty can
be used to separate between correctly and falsely classiﬁed
samples or between in-domain and out-of-distribution samples
[67]. For that, the samples are split into two sets, for example
in-domain and out-of-distribution or correctly classiﬁed and
falsely classiﬁed. The two most common approaches are
the Receiver Operating Characteristic (ROC) curve and the
Precision-Recall (PR) curve. Both methods generate curves
based on different thresholds of the underlying measure. For
each considered threshold, the ROC curve plots the true
positive rate against the false positive rate3, and the PR curve
plots the precision against the recall4. While the ROC and
PR curves give a visual idea of how well the underlying
measures are suited to separate the two considered test cases,
they do not give a qualitative measure. To reach this, the area
under the curve (AUC) can be evaluated. Roughly speaking,
the AUC gives a probability value that a randomly chosen
positive sample leads to a higher measure than a randomly
chosen negative example. For example, the maximum softmax
values measure ranks of correctly classiﬁed examples higher
than falsely classiﬁed examples. Hendrycks and Gimpel [67]
showed for several application ﬁelds that correct predictions
have in general a higher predicted certainty in the softmax
value than false predictions. Especially for the evaluation of
in-domain and out-of-distribution examples, the Area Under
Receiver Operating Curve (AUROC) and the Area Under
Precision Recall Curce (AUPRC) are commonly used [64],
[32], [94]. The clear weakness of these evaluations is the fact
that the performance is evaluated and the optimal threshold is
computed based on a given test data set. A distribution shift
from the test set distribution can ruin the whole performance
and make the derived thresholds impractical.
B. Evaluating Uncertainty in Regression Tasks
1) Measuring Data Uncertainty in Regression Predictions:
In contrast to classiﬁcation tasks, where the network typically
outputs a probability distritution over the possible classes,
regression tasks only predict a pointwise estimation without
any hint of data uncertainty. As already described in Section
3The true positive rate is the number of samples, which are correctly
predicted as positive divided by the total number of true samples. The false
positive rate is the number of samples falsely predicted as positive divided
by the total number of negative samples (see also [258])
4The precision is equal to the number of samples that are correctly classiﬁed
as positive, divided by the total number of positive samples. The recall is equal
to the number of samples correctly predicted as positive divided by the total
number of positive samples (see also [258])
III, a common approach to overcome this is to let the network
predict the parameters of a probability distribution, for exam-
ple a mean vector and a standard deviation for a normally
distributed uncertainty [31], [60]. Doing so, a measure of data
uncertainty is directly given. The prediction of the standard
deviation allows an analytical description that the (unknown)
true value is within a speciﬁc region. The interval that covers
the true value with a probability of α (under the assumption
that the predicted distribution is correct) is given by

ˆy −1
2Φ−1(α) · σ;
ˆy + 1
2Φ−1(α) · σ

(34)
where Φ−1 is the quantile function, the inverse of the cumu-
lative probability function. For a given probability value α the
quantile function gives a boundary, such that 100 · α% of a
standard normal distribution’s probability mass is on values
smaller than Φ−1(α). Quantiles assume some probability
distribution and interpret the given prediction as the expected
value of the distribution.
In contrast to this, other approaches [259], [260] directly
predict a so called prediction interval (PI)
PI(x) = [Bl, Bu]
(35)
in which the prediction is assumed to lay. Such intervals
induce an uncertainty as a uniform distribution without giving
a concrete prediction. The certainty of such approaches can,
as the name indicates, be directly measured by the size of
the predicted interval. The Mean Prediction Interval Width
(MPIW) can be used to evaluate the average certainty of
the model [259], [260]. In order to evaluate the correctness
of the predicted intervals the Prediction Interval Coverage
Probability (PICP) can be applied [259], [260]. The PCIP
represents the percentage of test predictions that fall into a
prediction interval and is deﬁned as
PICP = c
n ,
(36)
where n is the total number of predictions and c the number of
ground truth values that are actually captured by the predicted
intervals.
2) Measuring Model Uncertainty in Regression Predictions:
In Section II, it is described, that model uncertainty is mainly
caused by the model’s architecture, the training process, and
underrepresented areas in the training data. Hence, there is no
real difference in the causes and effects of model uncertainty
between regression and classiﬁcation tasks such that model
uncertainty in regression tasks can be measured equivalently
as already described for classiﬁcation tasks, i.e. in most cases
by approximating an average prediction and measuring the
divergence among the single predictions [60].
C. Evaluating Uncertainty in Segmentation Tasks
The evaluation of uncertainties in segmentation tasks is
very similar to the evaluation for classiﬁcation problems. The
uncertainty is estimated in segmentation tasks using approxi-
mates of Bayesian inference [1], [2], [4], [152], [261], [262],
[263], [264] or test-time data augmentation techniques [249].

24
In the context of segmentation, the uncertainty in pixel wise
segmentation is measured using conﬁdence intervals [4], [152],
the predictive variance [262], [264], the predictive entropy
[2], [249], [261], [263] or the mutual information [1]. The
uncertainty in structure (volume) estimation is obtained by av-
eraging over all pixel-wise uncertainty estimates [264], [261].
The quality of volume uncertainties is assessed by evaluating
the coefﬁcient of variation, the average Dice score or the
intersection over union [2], [249]. These metrics measure the
agreement in area overlap between multiple estimates in a pair-
wise fashion. Ideally, a false segmentation should result in an
increase in pixel-wise and structure uncertainty. To evaluate
whether this is the case, Nair et al. [1] evaluated the pixel-
level true positive rate and false detection rate as well as the
ROC curves for the retained pixels at different uncertainty
thresholds. Similar to [1], McClure et al. [261] also analyzed
the area under the ROC curve.
V. CALIBRATION
A predictor is called well-calibrated if the derived predictive
conﬁdence represents a good approximation of the actual
probability of correctness [15]. Therefore, in order to make
use of uncertainty quantiﬁcation methods, one has to be sure
that the network is well calibrated. Formally, for classiﬁcation
tasks a neural network fθ is calibrated [265] if it holds that
∀p ∈[0, 1] :
N
X
i=1
K
X
k=1
yi,k · I{fθ(xi)k = p}
I{fθ(xi)k = p}
N→∞
−−−−→p .
(37)
Here, I{·} is the indicator function that is either 1 if the
condition is true or 0 if it is false and yi,k is the k-th entry in
the one-hot encoded groundtruth vector of a training sample
(xi, yi). This formulation means that for example 30% of
all predictions with a predictive conﬁdence of 70% should
actually be false. For regression tasks the calibration can be
deﬁned such that predicted conﬁdence intervals should match
the conﬁdence intervals empirically computed from the data
set [265], i.e.
∀p ∈[0, 1] :
N
X
i=1
I {yi ∈confp(fθ(xi))}
N
N→∞
−−−−→p,
(38)
where confp is the conﬁdence interval that covers p percent
of a distribution.
A DNN is called under-conﬁdent if the left hand side of (37)
and (38) are larger than p. Equivalently, it is under-conﬁdent
if the terms are smaller than p. The calibration property of a
DNN can be visualized using a reliability diagram, as shown
in Figure 8.
In general, calibration errors are caused by factors related
to model uncertainty [15]. This is intuitively clear, since as
discussed in Section II, data uncertainty represents the under-
lying uncertainty that an input x and a target y represent the
same real world information. Following, correctly predicted
data uncertainty would lead to a perfectly calibrated neural
network. In practice, several works pointed out that deeper
networks tend to be more overconﬁdent than shallower ones
[15], [266], [267].
Several methods for uncertainty estimation presented in Sec-
tion III also improve the networks calibration [31], [20]. This
is clear, since these methods quantify model and data uncer-
tainty separately and aim at reducing the model uncertainty
on the predictions. Besides the methods that improve the
calibration by reducing the model uncertainty, a large and
growing body of literature has investigated methods for explic-
itly reducing calibration errors. These methods are presented in
the following, followed by measures to quantify the calibration
error. It is important to note that these methods do not reduce
the model uncertainty, but propagate the model uncertainty
onto the representation of the data uncertainty. For example,
if a binary classiﬁer is overﬁtted and predicts all samples of
a test set as class A with probability 1, while half of the test
samples are actually class B, the recalibration methods might
map the network output to 0.5 in order to have a reliable
conﬁdence. This probability of 0.5 is not equivalent to the data
uncertainty but represents the model uncertainty propagated
onto the predicted data uncertainty.
A. Calibration Methods
Calibration methods can be classiﬁed into three main groups
according to the step when they are applied:
• Regularization methods applied during the training phase
[268], [269], [11], [270], [271]
These methods modify the objective, optimization and/or
regularization procedure in order to build DNNs that are
inherently calibrated.
• Post-processing methods applied after the training pro-
cess of the DNN [15], [47]
These methods require a held-out calibration data set to
adjust the prediction scores for recalibration. They only
work under the assumption that the distribution of the
left-out validation set is equivalent to the distribution,
on which inference is done. Hence, also the size of the
validation data set can inﬂuence the calibration result.
• Neural network uncertainty estimation methods
Approaches, as presented in Section III, that reduce
the amount of model uncertainty on a neural network’s
conﬁdence prediction, also lead to a better calibrated
predictor. This is because the remaining predicted data
uncertainty better represents the actual uncertainty on
the prediction. Such methods are based for example on
Bayesian methods [272], [209], [273], [274], [16] or deep
ensembles [31], [275].
In the following, we present the three types of calibration
methods in more detail.
1) Regularization Methods:
Regularization methods for
calibrating conﬁdences manipulate the training of DNNs by
modifying the objective function or by augmenting the training
data set. The goal and idea of regularization methods is very
similar to the methods presented in Section III-A where the
methods mainly quantify model and data uncertainty sepa-
rately within a single forward pass. However, the methods
in Section III-A quantify the model and data uncertainty,
while these calibration methods are regularized in order to

25
(a) Underconﬁdence
(b) Overconﬁdence
(c) Calibrated classiﬁer
Fig. 8: (a) Reliability diagram showing an overconﬁdent classiﬁer: The bin-wise accuracy is smaller than the corresponding
conﬁdence. (b) Reliability diagram of an underconﬁdent classiﬁer: The bin-wise accuracy is larger than the corresponding
conﬁdence. (c) Reliability diagram of a well calibrated classiﬁer: The conﬁdence ﬁts the actual accuracy for the single bins.
minimize the model uncertainty. Following, at inference, the
model uncertainty cannot be obtained anymore. This is the
main motivation for us to separate the approaches presented
below from the approaches presented in Section III-A.
One popular regularization based calibration method is label
smoothing [268]. For label smoothing, the labels of the train-
ing examples are modiﬁed by taking a small portion α of the
true class’ probability mass and assign it uniformly to the false
classes. For hard, non-smoothed labels, the optimum cannot be
reached in practice, as the gradient of the output with respect
to the logit vector z,
∇zCE(y, ˆy(z)) = softmax(z) −y
=
exp(z)
PK
i=1 exp(zi)
−y ,
(39)
can only converge to zero with increasing distance between
the true and false classes’ logits. As a result, the logits of the
correct class are much larger than the logits for the incorrect
classes and the logits of the incorrect classes can be very
different to each other. Label-smoothing avoids this and while
it generally leads to a higher training loss, the calibration error
decreases and the accuracy often increases as well [270].
Seo et al. [266] extended the idea of label smoothing and
directly aimed at reducing the model uncertainty. For this,
they sampled T forward passes of a stochastic neural network
already at training time. Based on the T forward passes of
a training sample (xi, yi), a normalized model variance αi
is derived as the mean of the Bhattacharyya coefﬁcients [281]
between the T individual predictions ˆy1, ..., ˆyT and the average
prediction ¯y = 1
T
PT
t=1 ˆyt,
αi = 1
T
T
X
t=1
BC(¯yi, ˆyi,t)
= 1
T
T
X
t=1
K
X
k=1
p
¯yi,k · ˆyi,t,k .
(40)
Based on this αi, Seo et al. [266] introduced the variance-
weighted conﬁdence-integrated loss function that is a convex
combination of two contradictive loss functions,
LVWCI(θ) = −
N
X
i=1
(1 −αi)L(i)
GT(θ) + αiL(i)
U (θ) ,
(41)
where L(i)
GT is the mean cross-entropy computed for the training
sample xi with given ground-truth yi. LU represents the
mean KL-divergence between a uniform target probability
vector and the computed prediction. The adaptive smoothing
parameter αi pushes predictions of training samples with high
model uncertainty (given by high variances) towards a uniform
distribution while increasing the prediction scores of samples
with low model uncertainty. As a result, variances in the
predictions of a single sample are reduced and the network
can then be applied with a single forward pass at inference.
Pereyra et al. [269] combated the overconﬁdence issue by
adding the negative entropy to the standard loss function and
therefore a penalty that increases with the network’s predicted
conﬁdence. This results in the entropy-based objective function
LH, which is deﬁned as
LH(θ) = −1
N
N
X
i=1
yi log ˆyi −αiH(ˆyi) ,
(42)
where H(ˆyi) is the entropy of the output and αi a parameter
that controls the strength of the entropy-based conﬁdence
penalty. The parameter αi is computed equivalently as for the
VWCI loss.
Instead of regularizing the training process by modifying
the objective function, Thulasidasan et al. [278] regularized it
by using a data-agnostic data augmentation technique named
mixup [282]. In mixup training, the network is not only trained
on the training data, but also on virtual training samples (˜x, ˜y)
generated by a convex combination of two random training
pairs (xi, yi) and (xj, yj), i.e.
˜x = λxi + (1 −λ)xj
(43)
˜y = λyi + (1 −λ)yj .
(44)
According to [278], the label smoothing resulting from mixup
training can be viewed as a form of entropy-based regular-
ization resulting in inherent calibration of networks trained

26
Neural Network
Calibration
Methods
Regularization
Methods
Objective
Function
Modiﬁcation11
Data
Augmentation10
Label
Smoothing9
Exposure
to OOD
examples8
Uncertainty
Estimation
Approaches
Bayesian
Neural
Networks6
Ensemble
of Neural
Networks5
Post-Processing
Methods
Temperature
Scaling4
Histogram
Binning3
Gaussian
Processes2
Ensemble
of Post-
Processing
Models1
1 [48]
2 [47]
3 [276]
4[15], [68], [274]
5 [31], [275]
6 [272], [209], [273], [274], [16] 8 [277]
9 [268], [270]
10 [278], [279], [234], [280]
11 [269], [266], [11], [271], [279]
Fig. 9: Visualization of the different types of uncertainty calibration methods presented in this paper.
with mixup. Maro˜nas et al. [279] see mixup training among
the most popular data augmentation regularization techniques
due to its ability to improve the calibration as well as the
accuracy. However, they argued that in mixup training the
data uncertainty in mixed inputs affects the calibration and
therefore mixup does not necessarily improve the calibra-
tion. They also underlined this claim empirically. Similarly,
Rahaman and Thiery [234] experimentally showed that the
distributional-shift induced by data augmentation techniques
such as mixup training can negatively affect the conﬁdence
calibration. Based on this observation, Maro˜nas et al. [279]
proposed a new objective function that explicitly takes the
calibration performance on the unmixed input samples into
account. Inspired by the expected calibration error (ECE, see
Section V-B) Naeini et al. [283] measured the calibration
performance on the unmixed samples for each batch b by the
differentiable squared differences between the batch accuracy
and the mean conﬁdence on the batch samples. The total loss is
given as a weighted combination of the original loss on mixed
and unmixed samples and the calibration measure evaluated
only on the unmixed samples:
LECE(θ) = 1
B
X
b∈B
Lb(θ) + βECEb ,
(45)
where Lb(θ) is the original unregularized loss using training
and mixed samples included in batch b and β is a hyper-
parameter controlling the relative importance given to the
batchwise expected calibration error ECEb. By adding the
batchwise calibration error for each batch b ∈B to the
standard loss function, the miscalibration induced by mixup
training is regularized.
In the context of data augmentation, Patel et al. [280]
improved the calibration of uncertainty estimates by using on-
manifold data augmentation. While mixup training combines
training samples, on-manifold adversarial training generate
out-of-domain samples using adversarial attack. They experi-
mentally showed that on-manifold adversarial training outper-
forms mixup training in improving the calibration. Similar to
[280], Hendrycks et al. [277] showed that exposing classiﬁers
to out-of-distribution examples at training can help to improve
the calibration.

27
2) Post-Processing Methods: Post-processing (or post-hoc)
methods are applied after the training process and aim at
learning a re-calibration function. For this, a subset of the
training data is held-out during the training process and used
as a calibration set. The re-calibration function is applied to the
network’s outputs (e.g. the logit vector) and yields an improved
calibration learned on the left-out calibration set. Zhang et al.
[48] discussed three requirements that should be satisﬁed by
post-hoc calibration methods. They should
1) preserve the accuracy, i.e. should not affect the predic-
tors performance.
2) be data efﬁcient, i.e. only a small fraction of the training
data set should be left out for the calibration.
3) be able to approximate the correct re-calibration map as
long as there is enough data available for calibration.
Furthermore, they pointed out that none of the existing ap-
proaches fulﬁlls all three requirements.
For classiﬁcation tasks, the most basic but still very efﬁcient
way of post-hoc calibration is temperature scaling [15]. For
temperature scaling, the temperature T > 0 of the softmax
function
softmax(zi) =
expzi/T
PK
j=1 expzj/T ,
(46)
is optimized. For T = 1 the function remains the regular
softmax function. For T > 1 the output changes such that its
entropy increases, i.e. the predicted conﬁdence decreases. For
T ∈(0, 1) the entropy decreases and following, the predicted
conﬁdence increases. As already mentioned above, a perfect
calibrated neural network outputs MAP estimates. Since the
learned transformation can only affect the uncertainty, the
log-likelihood based losses as cross-entropy do not have to
be replaced by a special calibration loss. While the data
efﬁciency and the preservation of the accuracy is given, the
expressiveness of basic temperature scaling is limited [48]. To
overcome this, Zhang et al. [48] investigated an ensemble of
several temperature scaling models. Doing so, they achieved
better calibrated predictions, while preserving the classiﬁcation
accuracy and improving the data efﬁciency and the expressive
power. Kull et al. [284] were motivated by non-neural network
calibration methods, where the calibration is performed class-
wise as a one-vs-all binary calibration. They showed that this
approach can be interpreted as learning a linear transforma-
tion of the predicted log-likelihoods followed by a softmax
function. This again is equivalent to train a dense layer on the
log-probabilities and hence the method is also very easy to
implement and apply. Obviously, the original predictions are
not guaranteed to be preserved.
Analogous to temperature scaling for classiﬁcation net-
works, Levi et al. [285] introduced standard deviation scaling
(std-scaling) for regression networks. As the name indicates,
the method is trained to rescale the predicted standard de-
viations of a given network. Equivalently to the motivation
of optimizing temperature scaling with the cross-entropy loss,
std-scaling can be trained using the Gaussian log-likelihood
function as loss, which is in general also used for the training
of regression networks, which also give a prediction for the
data uncertainty.
Wenger et al. [47] proposed a Gaussian process (GP)
based method, which can be used to calibrate any multi-class
classiﬁer that outputs conﬁdence values and presented their
methodology by calibrating neural networks. The main idea
behind their work is to learn the calibration map by a Gaussian
process that is trained on the networks conﬁdence predictions
and the corresponding ground-truths in the left out calibration
set. For this approach, the preservation of the predictions is
also not assured.
3) Calibration with Uncertainty Estimation Approaches:
As already discussed above, removing the model uncertainty
and receiving an accurate estimation of the data uncertainty
leads to a well calibrated predictor. Following several works
based on deep ensembles [31], [275] and BNNs, [272], [209],
[204] also compared their performance to other methods based
on the resulting calibration. Lakshminarayanan et al. [31]
and Mehrtash et al. [275] reported an improved calibration
by applying deep ensembles compared to single networks.
However, Rahaman and Thiery[234] showed that for speciﬁc
conﬁgurations as the usage of mixup-regularization, deep
ensembles can even increase the calibration error. On the
other side they showed that applying temperature scaling on
the averaged predictions can give a signiﬁcant improvement
on the calibration.
For the Bayesian approaches, [204] showed that restricting
the Bayesian approximation to the weights of the last fully
connected layer of a DNN is already enough to improve the
calibration signiﬁcantly. Zhang et al. [273] and Laves et al.
[274] showed that conﬁdence estimates computed with MC
dropout can be poorly calibrated. To overcome this, Zhang
et al. [273] proposed structured dropout, which consists
of dropping channel, blocks or layers, to promote model
diversity and reduce calibration errors.
B. Evaluating Calibration Quality
Evaluating calibration consists of measuring the statistical
consistency between the predictive distributions and the ob-
servations [286]. For classiﬁcation tasks, several calibration
measures are based on binning. For that, the predictions are
ordered by the predicted conﬁdence ˆpi and grouped into M
bins b1, ..., bM. Following, the calibration of the single bins is
evaluated by setting the average bin conﬁdence
conf(bm) =
1
|bm|
X
s∈bm
ˆps
(47)
in relation to the average bin accuracy
acc(bm) =
1
|bm|
X
s∈bm
1(ˆys = ys) ,
(48)
where ˆys, ys and ˆps refer to the predicted and true class
label of a sample s. As noted in [15], conﬁdences are well-
calibrated when for each bin acc(bm) = conf(bm). For a visual
evaluation of a model’s calibration, the reliability diagram
introduced by [287] is widely used. For a reliability diagram,
the conf(bm) is plotted against acc(bm). For a well-calibrated
model, the plot should be close to the diagonal, as visualized

28
in Figure 8. The basic reliability diagram visualization does
not distinguish between different classes. In order to do so and
hence to improve the interpretability of the calibration error,
Vaicenavicius et al. [286] used an alternative visualization
named multidimensional reliability diagram.
For a quantitative evaluation of a model’s calibration, dif-
ferent calibration measures can be considered.
The Expected Calibration Error (ECE) is a widely used
binning based calibration measure [283], [15], [274], [275],
[278], [47]. For the ECE, M equally-spaced bins b1, ..., bM
are considered, where bm denotes the set of indices of samples
whose conﬁdences fall into the interval Im =] m−1
M , m
M ]. The
ECE is then computed as the weighted average of the bin-wise
calibration errors, i.e.
ECE =
M
X
m=1
|bm|
N |acc(bm) −conf(bm)| .
(49)
For the ECE, only the predicted conﬁdence score (top-label)
is considered. In contrast to this, the Static Calibration Error
(SCE) [288], [289] considers the predictions of all classes (all-
labels). For each class, the SCE computes the calibration error
within the bins and then averages across all the bins, i.e.
SCE = 1
K
K
X
k=1
M
X
m=1
|bmk|
N
|conf(bmk) −acc(bmk)| .
(50)
Here conf(bmk) and acc(bmk) are the conﬁdence and accu-
racy of bin bm for class label k, respectively. Nixon et al.
[288] empirically showed that all-labels calibration measures
such as the SCE are more effective in assessing the calibration
error than the top-label calibration measures as the ECE.
In contrast to the ECE and SCE, which group predictions
into M equally-spaced bins (what in general leads to different
numbers of evaluation samples per bin), the adaptive calibra-
tion error [288], [289] adaptively groups predictions into R
bins with different width but equal number of predictions. With
this adaptive bin size, the adaptive Expected Calibration Error
(aECE)
aECE = 1
R
R
X
r=1
|conf(br) −acc(br)| ,
(51)
and the adaptive Static Calibration Error (aSCE)
aSCE =
1
KR
K
X
k=1
R
X
r=1
|conf(brk) −acc(brk)|
(52)
are deﬁned as extensions of the ECE and the SCE.
As has been empirically shown in [280] and [288], the adaptive
binning calibration measures aECE and aSCE are more robust
to the number of bins than the corresponding equal-width
binning calibration measures ECE and SCE.
It is important to make clear that in a multi-class setting,
the calibration measures can suffer from imbalance in the
test data. Even when then calibration is computed classwise,
the computed errors are weighted by the number of samples
in the classes. Following, larger classes can shadow the bad
calibration on small classes, comparable to accuracy values in
classiﬁcation tasks [290].
VI. DATA SETS AND BASELINES
In this section, we collect commonly used tasks and data
sets for evaluating uncertainty estimation among existing
works. Besides, a variety of baseline approaches commonly
used as comparison against the methods proposed by the
researchers are also presented. By providing a review on the
relevant information of these experiments, we hope that both
researchers and practitioners can beneﬁt from it. While the
former can gain a basic understanding of recent benchmarks
tasks, data sets and baselines so that they can design ap-
propriate experiments to validate their ideas more efﬁciently,
the latter might use the provided information to select more
relevant approaches to start based on a concise overview on the
tasks and data sets on which the approach has been validated.
In the following, we will introduce the data sets and
baselines summarized in table IV according to the taxonomy
used throughout this review.
The structure of the table is designed to organize the main
contents of this section concisely, hoping to provide a clear
overview of the relevant works. We group the approaches of
each category into one of four blocks and extract the most
commonly used tasks, data sets and provided baselines for
each column respectively. The corresponding literature is listed
at the bottom of each block to facilitate lookup. Note that we
focus on methodological comparison here, but not the choice
of architecture for different methods which has an impact on
performance as well. Due to the space limitation and visual
density, we only show the most important elements (task, data
set, baselines) ranked according to the frequency of use in the
literature we have researched.
The main results are as follows. One of the most frequent
tasks for evaluating uncertainty estimation methods are re-
gression tasks, where samples close and far away from the
training distribution are studied. Furthermore, the calibration
of uncertainty estimates in the case of classiﬁcation problems
is very often investigated. Further noteworthy tasks are out-
of-distribution (OOD) detection and robustness against adver-
sarial attacks. In the medical domain, calibration of semantic
segmentation results is the predominant use case.
The choice of data sets is mostly consistent among all
reviewed works. For regression, toy data sets are employed for
visualization of uncertainty intervals while the UCI data sets
are studied in light of (negative) log-likelihood comparison.
The most common data sets for calibration and OOD detection
are MNIST, CIFAR10 and 100 as well as SVHN while
ImageNet and its tiny variant are also studied frequently. These
form distinct pairs when OOD detection is studied where
models trained on CIFAR variants are evaluated on SVHN
and visa versa while MNIST is paired with variants of itself
like notMNIST and FashionMNIST. Classiﬁcation data sets
are also commonly distorted and corrupted to study the effects
on calibration, blurring the line between OOD detection and
adversarial attacks.
Finally, the most commonly used baselines by far are Monte
Carlo (MC) Dropout and deep ensembles while the softmax
output of deterministic models is almost always employed
as a kind of surrogate baseline. It is interesting to note that

29
TABLE IV: Overview of frequently compared benchmark approaches, tasks and their data sets among existing works organized
according to the taxonomy of this paper.
Tasks
Task index: Data sets
Baselines
Bayesian Neural
Networks
1. Regression1,3,4,7,8,11,12,15-17
2. Calibration6,10,13,14
3. OOD Detection4,6,8,10,12,13
4. Adversarial Attacks4,8,12
5. Active Learning7,12,14
6. Continual Learning10
7. Reinforcement Learning (Intrinsic
Motivation, Contextual Bandits)1,14,15
1: UCI
2, 3, 4: (not)MNIST,
CIFAR10/100, SHVN,
ImageNet
5: UCI
6: Permuted MNIST
Softmax44,
MCdropout1,
DeepEnsemble2,
BBB3, NormalizingFlow4,
PBP7, SWAG6,
KFAC8, DVI11
HMC9,
VOGN10, INF12
1[20]
3[30]
4[149]
5[75]
6[213]
7[129]
8[63]
9[80]
10[150]
11[143]
12[84]
13[235]
14[145]
15[135]
16[146]
17[272]
Ensembles
1. Regression2,20
2. Calibration2,20,24-32
3. OOD Detection2,20,25,27-30,32-34
4. Active Learning31
1: Toy7, UCI
2, 3: Toy, (not)MNIST, SVHN,
LSUN, CIFAR10/100,
(Tiny)ImageNet,
Diabetic Retinopathy
4: MNIST
Softmax44, MFVI5, SGLD55,
MCdropout1, DeepEnsemble2,
BBB3, PBP7, NormalizingFlow4,
TemperatureScaling38,54
2[31]
20[90]
24[234]
25[85]
26[86]
27[94]
28[39]
29[235]
30[40]
31[240]
32[13]
33[241]
34[246]
Single Deterministic
Models
1. Regression21-23
2. Calibration21-23,39,40,41,43
3. OOD Detection21,22,38,39,41-53
4. Adversarial Attacks21,41,48
1. Toy7, UCI, NYU Depth
2, 3: (E/Fashion/not)MNIST,
Toy, CIFAR10/100, SVHN,
LSUN, (Tiny)ImageNet, IMDB,
Diabetic
Retinopathy,
Om-
niglot
4: MNIST, CIFAR10, NYU
Depth, Omniglot
Softmax44, GAN27, Dirichlet48, BBB3,
MCdropout1, DeepEnsemble2,57,
Mahalanobis56, TemperatureScaling38,54
NormalizingFlow4
21[101]
22[103]
23[104]
38[68] 39[143] 40[98] 41[43] 42[96] 43[95] 44[67] 45[64] 46[92] 47[72] 48[44] 49[94] 50[35] 51[36] 52[46] 53[71]
Test-Time Data
Augmentation
1. Semantic Segmentation36, 37
2. Calibration35
3. OOD Detection35-37
1, 2, 3: Medical data, Diabetic
Retinopathy
Softmax44, MCdropout1
35[14]
36[248]
37[249]
54[15] 55[81] 56[291] 57[259]
inside each approach–BNNs, Ensembles, Single Deterministic
Models and Input Augmentation–some baselines are preferred
over others. BNNs are most frequently compared against
variational inference methods like Bayes’ by Backprop (BBB)
or Probabilistic Backpropagation (PBP) while for Single De-
terministic Models it is more common to compare them against
distance-based methods in the case of OOD detection. Overall,
BNN methods show a more diverse set of tasks considered
while being less frequently evaluated on large data sets like
ImageNet.
To further facilitate access for practitioners, we provide
web-links to the authors’ ofﬁcial implementations (marked by
a star) of all common baselines as identiﬁed in the baselines
column. Where no ofﬁcial implementation is provided, we
instead link to the highest ranked implementations found on
GitHub at the time of this survey. The list can be also found
within our GitHub repository on available implementations5.
The relevant baselines are Softmax* (TensorFlow, PyTorch),
MCdropout (TensorFlow*; PyTorch: 1, 2), DeepEnsembles
(TensorFlow: 1, 2, 3; PyTorch: 1, 2), BBB (PyTorch: 1, 2, 3,
5https://github.com/JakobCode/UncertaintyInNeuralNetworks Resources
4), NormalizingFlow (TensorFlow, PyTorch), PBP, SWAG (1*,
2), KFAC (PyTorch: 1, 2, 3; TensorFlow), DVI (TensorFlow*,
PyTorch), HMC, VOGN*, INF*, MFVI, SGLD, Tempera-
tureScaling (1*, 2, 3), GAN*, Dirichlet and Mahalanobis*.
VII. APPLICATIONS OF UNCERTAINTY ESTIMATES
From a practical point of view, the main motivation for
quantifying uncertainties in DNNs is to be able to classify the
received predictions and to make more conﬁdent decisions.
This section gives a brief overview and examples of the
aforementioned motivations. In the ﬁrst part, we discuss how
uncertainty is used within active learning and reinforcement
learning. Subsequently, we discuss the interest of the commu-
nities working on domain ﬁelds like medical image analysis,
robotics, and earth observation. These application ﬁelds are
used representatively for the large number of domains where
the uncertainty quantiﬁcation plays an important role. The
challenges and concepts could (and should) be transferred to
any application domain of interest.
1) Active Learning: The process of collecting labeled data
for supervised training of a DNN can be laborious, time-
consuming, and costly. To reduce the annotation effort, the

30
Pool with
unlabeled data
Predictor
Labeled
training data
Chose and label data
(aquisition function)
Retrain neural
network
Test neural
network
Uncertain test
predictions
Fig. 10: The active learning framework: The acquisition
function evaluates the uncertainties on the network’s test
predictions in order to select unlabelled data. The selected data
are labelled and added to the pool of labelled data, which is
used to train and improve the performance of the predictor.
active learning framework shown in Figure 10 trains the DNN
sequentially on different labelled data sets increasing in size
over time [292]. In particular, given a small labelled data set
and a large unlabeled data set, a deep neural network trained
in the setting of active learning learns from the small labeled
data set and decides based on the acquisition function, which
samples to select from the pool of unlabeled data. The selected
data are added to the training data set and a new DNN is
trained on the updated training data set. This process is then
repeated with the training set increasing in size over time.
Uncertainty sampling is one most popular criteria used in
acquisition functions [293] where predictive uncertainty de-
termines which training samples have the highest uncertainty
and should be labelled next. Uncertainty based active learning
strategies for deep learning applications have been successfully
used in several works [23], [24], [294], [25], [26].
2) Reinforcement Learning:
The general framework of
deep reinforcement learning is shown in Figure 11. In the
context of reinforcement learning, uncertainty estimates can be
used to solve the exploration-exploitation dilemma. It says that
uncertainty estimates can be used to effectively balance the
exploration of unknown environments with the exploitation of
existing knowledge extracted from known environments. For
example, if a robot interacts with an unknown environment, the
robot can safely avoid catastrophic failures by reasoning about
its uncertainty. To estimate the uncertainty in this framework,
Huang et al. [27] used an ensemble of bootstrapped models
(models trained on different data sets sampled with replace-
ment from the original data set), while Gal and Ghahramani
[20] approximated Bayesian inference via dropout sampling.
Inspired by [20] and [27], Kahn et al. [28] and L¨otjens et
al. [29] used a mixture of deep Bayesian networks performing
dropout sampling on an ensemble of bootstrapped models. For
further reading, Ghavamzadeh et al. [295] presented a survey
of Bayesian reinforcement learning.
Agent
Environment
Observed
state
Apply
action
S
t
a
t
e
Distribution 
of actions
Receive
reward
Update
parameters
Fig. 11: The reinforcement learning framework: The agent
interacts with the environment by executing a speciﬁc action
inﬂuencing the next state of the agent. The agent observes a re-
ward representing the cost associated with the executed action.
The agent chooses actions based on a policy learned by a deep
neural network. However, the predicted uncertainty associated
with the action predicted by the deep neural network can help
the agent to decide weather to execute the predicted action or
not.
A. Uncertainty in Real-World Applications
With increasing usage of deep learning approaches within
many different ﬁelds, quantifying and handling uncertainties
has become more and more important. On one hand, uncer-
tainty quantiﬁcation plays an important role in risk minimiza-
tion, which is needed in many application ﬁelds. On the other
hand, many ﬁelds offer only challenging data sources, which
are hard to control and verify. This makes the generation
of trust-worthy ground truth a very challenging task. In the
following, three different ﬁelds where uncertainty plays an
important role are presented, namely Autonomous Driving,
medical image analysis, and earth observation.
1) Medical Analysis: Since the size, shape, and location
of many diseases vary largely across patients, the estimation
of the predictive uncertainty is crucial in analyzing medical
images in applications such as lesion detection [1], [3], lung
node segmentation [296], brain tumor segmentation [152],
[248], [249], [2], [261], parasite segmentation in images of
liver stage malaria [262], recognition of abnormalities on chest
radiographs [297], and age estimation [6]. Here, uncertainty
estimates in particular improve the interpretability of decisions
of DNNs [298]. They are essential to understand the reliability
of segmentation results, to detect false segmented areas and
to guide human experts in the task of reﬁnement [249]. Well-
calibrated and reliable uncertainty estimates allow clinical
experts to properly judge whether an automated diagnosis can
be trusted [298]. Uncertainty was estimated in medical image
segmentation based on Monte Carlo dropout [152], [296], [1],
[2], [3], [263], [4], [5], [6], spike-and-slab dropout [261], and
spatial dropout [262]. Wang et al. [248], [249] used test time
data augmentation to estimate the data-dependent uncertainty
in medical image segmentation.

31
2) Robotics: Robots are active agents that perceive, decide,
plan, and act in the real-world – all based on their incomplete
knowledge about the world. As a result, mistakes of the robots
not only cause failures of their own mission, but can endanger
human lives, e.g. in case of surgical robotics, self-driving cars,
space robotics, etc. Hence, the robotics application of deep
learning poses unique research challenges that signiﬁcantly
differ from those often addressed in computer vision and
other off-line settings [299]. For example, the assumption
that the testing condition come from the same distribution as
training is often invalid in many settings of robotics, resulting
in deterioration of the performance of DNNs in uncontrolled
and detrimental conditions. This raises the questions how we
can quantify the uncertainty in a DNN’s predictions in order
to avoid catastrophic failures. Answering such questions are
important in robotics, as it might be a lofty goal to expect data-
driven approaches (in many aspects from control to perception)
to always be accurate. Instead, reasoning about uncertainty can
help in leveraging the recent advances in deep learning for
robotics.
Reasoning about uncertainties and the use of probabilistic
representations, as oppose to relying on a single, most-likely
estimate, have been central to many domains of robotics
research, even before the advent of deep learning [300].
In robot perception, several uncertainty-aware methods have
been proposed in the past, starting from localization methods
[301], [302], [303] to simultaneous localization and mapping
(SLAM) frameworks [304], [305], [306], [307]. As a result,
many probabilistic methods such as factor graphs [308], [309]
are now the work-horse of advanced consumer products such
as robotic vacuum cleaners and unmanned aerial vehicles.
In case of planning and control, estimation problems are
widely treated as Bayesian sequential learning problems, and
sequential decision making frameworks such as POMDPs
[310], [311] assume a probabilistic treatment of the underlying
planning problems. With probabilistic representations, many
reinforcement learning algorithms are backed up by stability
guarantees for safe interactions in the real-world [312], [313],
[314]. Lastly, there have been also several advances starting
from reasoning (semantics [315] to joint reasoning with ge-
ometry), embodiment (e.g. active perception [316]) to learn-
ing (e.g. active learning [317], [318], [319] and identifying
unknown objects [320], [321], [322]).
Similarly, with the advent of deep learning, many re-
searchers proposed new methods to quantify the uncertainty
in deep learning as well as on how to further exploit such
information. As oppose to many generic approaches, we sum-
marize task-speciﬁc methods and their application in practice
as followings. Notably, [323] proposed to perform novelty de-
tection using auto-encoders, where the reconstructed outputs of
auto-encoders was used to decide how much one can trust the
network’s predictions. Peretroukhin et al. [324] developed a
SO(3) representation and uncertainty estimation framework for
the problem of rotational learning problems with uncertainty.
[325], [28], [326], [327] demonstrated uncertainty-aware, real
world application of a reinforcement learning algorithm for
robotics, while [328], [329] proposed to leverage spatial infor-
mation, on top of MC-dropout. [207], [330], [331] developed
deep learning based localization systems along with uncer-
tainty estimates. Other approaches also learn on the robots’
past experiences of failures or detect inconsistencies of the
predictors [332], [333]. In summary, the robotics community
has been both, the users and the developers of the uncertainty
estimation frameworks targeted to a speciﬁc problems.
Yet, robotics pose several unique challenges to uncertainty
estimation methods for DNNs. These are for example, (i) how
to limit the computational burden and build real-time capable
methods that can be executed on the robots with limited
computational capacities (e.g. aerial, space robots, etc); (ii)
how to leverage spatial and temporal information, as robots
sense sequentially instead of having a batch of training data
for uncertainty estimates; (iii) whether robots can select the
most uncertainty samples and update its learner online; (iv)
Whether robots can purposefully manipulate the scene when
uncertain. Most of these challenges arise due to the properties
of robots that they are physically situated systems.
3) Earth Observation(EO): Earth Observation (EO) sys-
tems are increasingly used to make critical decisions related
to urban planning [334], resource management [335], disaster
response [336], and many more. Right now, there are hundreds
of EO satellites in space, owned by different space agencies
and private companies. Figure 12 shows the satellites owned
by the European Space Agency (ESA). Like in many other do-
mains, deep learning has shown great initial success in the ﬁeld
of EO over the past few years [337]. These early successes
consisted of taking the latest developments of deep learning
in computer vision and applying them to small curated earth
observation data sets [337]. At the same time, the underlying
data is very challenging. Even though the amount of data is
huge, so is the variability in the data. This variability is caused
by different sensor types, spatial changes (e.g. different regions
and resolutions), and temporal changes (e.g. changing light
conditions, weather conditions, seasons). Besides the challenge
of efﬁcient uncertainty quantiﬁcation methods for such large
amounts of data, several other challenges that can be tackled
with uncertainty quantiﬁcation exist in the ﬁeld of EO. All
in all, the sensitivity of many EO applications together with
the nature of EO systems and the challenging EO data make
the quantiﬁcation of uncertainties very important in this ﬁeld.
Despite hundreds of publications in the last years on DL for
EO, the range of literature on measuring uncertainties of these
systems is relatively small.
Furthermore, due to the large variation in the data, a data
sample received at test time is often not covered by the training
data distribution. For example while preparing training data for
a local climate zone classiﬁcation, the human experts might
be presented only with images where there is no obstruction
and structures are clearly visible. When a model which is
trained on this data set is deployed in real world, it might
see the images with clouds obstructing the structures or snow
giving them a completely different look. Also, the classes in
EO data can have a very wide distribution. For example, there
are millions of types of houses in the world and no training
data can contain the examples for all of them. The question
is where the OOD detector will draw the line and declare the
following houses as OOD. Hence, OOD detection is important

32
in earth observation and uncertainty measurements play an
important part in this [22].
Another common task in EO, where uncertainties can play
an important role, is the data fusion. Optical images normally
contain only a few channels like RGB. In contrast to this,
EO data can contain optical images with up to hundreds of
channels, and a variety of different sensors with different
spatial, temporal, and semantic properties. Fusing the infor-
mation from these different sources and channels propagates
the uncertainties from different sources onto the prediction.
The challenge lies in developing methods that do not only
quantify uncertainties but also the amount of contribution from
different channels individually and which learn to focus on the
trustworthy data source for a given sample [338].
Unlike normal computer vision scenarios where the image
acquisition equipment is quite near to the subject, the EO
satellites are hundreds of kilometers away from the sub-
ject. The sensitivity of sensors, the atmospheric absorption
properties, and surface reﬂectance properties all contribute to
uncertainties in the acquired data. Integrating the knowledge
of physical EO systems, which also contain information about
uncertainty models in those systems, is another major open
issue. However, for several applications in EO, measuring
uncertainties is not only something good to have but rather
an important requirement of the ﬁeld. E.g., the geo-variables
derived from EO data may be assimilated into process models
(ocean, hydrological, weather, climate, etc) and the assimi-
lation requires the probability distribution of the estimated
variables.
VIII. CONCLUSION AND OUTLOOK
A. Conclusion - How well do the current uncertainty quan-
tiﬁcation methods work for real world applications?
Even though many advances on uncertainty quantiﬁcation
in neural networks have been made over the last years, their
adoption in practical mission- and safety-critical applications
is still limited. There are several reasons for this, which are
discussed one-by-one as follows:
• Missing Validation of Existing Methods over Real-
World Problems
Although DNNs have become the defacto standard in
solving numerous computer vision and medical image
processing tasks, the majority of existing models are not
able to appropriately quantify uncertainty that is inherent
to their inferences particularly in real world applications.
This is primarily because the baseline models are mostly
developed using standard data sets such as Cifar10/100,
ImageNet, or well known regression data sets that are
speciﬁc to a particular use case and are therefore not
readily applicable to complex real-world environments,
as for example low resolutional satellite data or other data
sources affected by noise. Although many researchers
from other ﬁelds apply uncertainty quantiﬁcation in their
ﬁeld [21], [10], [8], a broad and structured evaluation of
existing methods based on different real world applica-
tions is not available yet. Works like [56] already built
ﬁrst steps towards a real life evaluation.
• Lack of Standardized Evaluation Protocol
Existing methods for evaluating the estimated uncertainty
are better suited to compare uncertainty quantiﬁcation
methods based on measurable quantities such as the cal-
ibration [340] or the performance on out-of-distribution
detection [32]. As described in Section VI, these tests
are performed on standardized sets within the machine
learning community. Furthermore, the details of these
experiments might differ in the experimental setting from
paper to paper [214]. However, a clear standardized proto-
col of tests that should be performed on uncertainty quan-
tiﬁcation methods is still not available. For researchers
from other domains it is difﬁcult to directly ﬁnd state
of the art methods for the ﬁeld they are interested in,
not to speak of the hard decision on which sub-ﬁeld of
uncertainty quantiﬁcation to focus. This makes the direct
comparison of the latest approaches difﬁcult and also
limits the acceptance and adoption of current existing
methods for uncertainty quantiﬁcation.
• Inability to Evaluate Uncertainty Associated to a
Single Decision
Existing measures for evaluating the estimated uncer-
tainty (e.g., the expected calibration error) are based
on the whole testing data set. This means, that equiv-
alent to classiﬁcation tasks on unbalanced data sets,
the uncertainty associated with single samples or small
groups of samples may potentially get biased towards
the performance on the rest of the data set. But for
practical applications, assessing the reliability of a pre-
dicted conﬁdence would give much more possibilities
than an aggregated reliability based on some testing data,
which are independent from the current situation [341].
Especially for mission- and safety-critical applications,
pointwise evaluation measures could be of paramount
importance and hence such evaluation approaches are
very desirable.
• Lack of Ground Truth Uncertainties
Current methods are empirically evaluated and the per-
formance is underlined by reasonable and explainable
values of uncertainty. A ground truth uncertainty that
could be used for validation is in general not available.
Additionally, even though existing methods are calibrated
on given data sets, one cannot simply transfer these
results to any other data set since one has to be aware
of shifts in the data distribution and that many ﬁelds can
only cover a tiny portion of the actual data environment.
In application ﬁelds as EO, the preparation of a huge
amount of training data is hard and expensive and hence
synthetic data can be used to train a model. For this artiﬁ-
cial data, artiﬁcial uncertainties in labels and data should
be taken into account to receive a better understanding
of the uncertainty quantiﬁcation performance. The gap
between the real and synthetic data, or estimated and
real uncertainty further limits the adoption of currently
existing methods for uncertainty quantiﬁcation.
• Explainability Issue:

33
Fig. 12: European Space Agency (ESA) Developed Earth Observation Missions [339].
Existing methods of neural network uncertainty quantiﬁ-
cation deliver predictions of certainty without any clue
about what causes possible uncertainties. Even though
those certainty values often look reasonable to a human
observer, one does not know whether the uncertainties
are actually predicted based on the same observations the
human observer made. But without being sure about the
reasons and motivations of single uncertainty estimations,
a proper transfer from one data set to another, and even
only a domain shift, are much harder to realize with a
guaranteed performance. Regarding safety critical real
life applications, the lack of explainability makes the
application of the available methods signiﬁcantly harder.
Besides the explainability of neural networks decisions,
existing methods for uncertainty quantiﬁcation are not
well understood on a higher level. For instance, ex-
plaining the behavior of single deterministic approaches,
ensembles or Bayesian methods is a current direction of
research and remains difﬁcult to grasp in every detail
[227]. It is, however, crucial to understand how those
methods operate and capture uncertainty to identify path-
ways for reﬁnement, detect and characterize uncertainty,
failures and important shortcomings [227].
B. Outlook
• Generic Evaluation Framework
As already discussed above, there are still problems
regarding the evaluation of uncertainty methods, as the
lack of ’ground truth’ uncertainties, the inability to test
on single instances, and standardized benchmarking pro-
tocols, etc. To cope with such issues, the provision of an
evaluation protocol containing various concrete baseline
data sets and evaluation metrics that cover all types of
uncertainty would undoubtedly help to boost research
in uncertainty quantiﬁcation. Also, the evaluation with
regard to risk-averse and worst case scenarios should be
considered there. This means, that uncertainty predictions
with a very high predicted uncertainty should never fail,
as for example for a prediction of a red or green trafﬁc
light. Such a general protocol would enable researchers
to easily compare different types of methods against an
established benchmark as well as on real world data
sets. The adoption of such a standard evaluation protocol
should be encouraged by conferences and journals.
• Expert & Systematic Comparison of Baselines
A broad and structured comparison of existing methods
for uncertainty estimation on real world applications is
not available yet. An evaluation on real world data is even
not standard in current machine learning research papers.
As a result, given a speciﬁc application, it remains unclear
which method for uncertainty estimation performs best
and whether the latest methods outperform older methods
also on real world examples. This is also partly caused
by the fact, that researchers from other domains that
use uncertainty quantiﬁcation methods, in general present
successful applications of single approaches on a speciﬁc
problem or a data set by hand. Considering this, there
are several points that could be adopted for a better
comparison within the different research domains. For
instance, domain experts should also compare different
approaches against each other and present the weaknesses
of single approaches in this domain. Similarly, for a better
comparison among several domains, a collection of all
the works in the different real world domains could be
collected and exchanged on a central platform. Such a
platform might also help machine learning researchers
in providing an additional source of challenges in the
real world and would pave way to broadly highlight
weaknesses in the current state of the art approaches.
Google’s repository on baselines in uncertainties in neural

34
networks [340]6 could be such a platform and a step
towards achieving this goal.
• Uncertainty Ground Truths
It remains difﬁcult to validate existing methods due to the
lack of uncertainty ground truths. An actual uncertainty
ground truth on which methods can be compared in an
ImageNet like manner would make the evaluation of
predictions on single samples possible. To reach this, the
evaluation of the data generation process and occurring
sources of uncertainty, as for example the labeling pro-
cess, might be investigated in more detail.
• Explainability and Physical Models
Knowing the actual reasons for a false high certainty
or a low certainty makes it much easier to engineer
the methods for real life applications, which again in-
creases the trust of people into such methods. Recently,
Antor´an et al. [342] claimed to have published the ﬁrst
work on explainable uncertainty estimation. Uncertainty
estimations, in general, form an important step towards
explainable artiﬁcial intelligence. Explainable uncertainty
estimations would give an even deeper understanding of
the decision process of a neural network, which, in prac-
tical deployment of DNNs, shall incorporate the desired
ability to be risk averse while staying applicable in real
world (especially safety critical applications). Also, the
possibility of improving explainability with physically
based arguments offers great potential. While DNNs are
very ﬂexible and efﬁcient, they do not directly embed the
domain speciﬁc expert knowledge that is mostly available
and can often be described by mathematical or physical
models, as for example earth system science problems
[343]. Such physic guided models offer a variety of
possibilities to include explicit knowledge as well as
practical uncertainty representations into a deep learning
framework [344], [345].
REFERENCES
[1] T. Nair, D. Precup, D. L. Arnold, and T. Arbel, “Exploring uncertainty
measures in deep networks for multiple sclerosis lesion detection and
segmentation,” Medical image analysis, vol. 59, p. 101557, 2020.
[2] A. G. Roy, S. Conjeti, N. Navab, C. Wachinger, A. D. N. Initiative
et al., “Bayesian quicknat: Model uncertainty in deep whole-brain
segmentation for structure-wise quality control,” NeuroImage, vol. 195,
pp. 11–22, 2019.
[3] P. Seeb¨ock, J. I. Orlando, T. Schlegl, S. M. Waldstein, H. Bogunovi´c,
S. Klimscha, G. Langs, and U. Schmidt-Erfurth, “Exploiting epistemic
uncertainty of anatomy segmentation for anomaly detection in retinal
oct,” IEEE transactions on medical imaging, vol. 39, no. 1, pp. 87–98,
2019.
[4] T. LaBonte, C. Martinez, and S. A. Roberts, “We know where we
don’t know: 3d bayesian cnns for credible geometric uncertainty,” arXiv
preprint arXiv:1910.10793, 2019.
[5] J. C. Reinhold, Y. He, S. Han, Y. Chen, D. Gao, J. Lee, J. L. Prince,
and A. Carass, “Validating uncertainty in medical image translation,”
in 2020 IEEE 17th International Symposium on Biomedical Imaging
(ISBI).
IEEE, 2020, pp. 95–98.
[6] S. Eggenreich, C. Payer, M. Urschler, and D. ˇStern, “Variational in-
ference and bayesian cnns for uncertainty estimation in multi-factorial
bone age prediction,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2002.10819, 2020.
[7] D. Feng, L. Rosenbaum, and K. Dietmayer, “Towards safe autonomous
driving: Capture uncertainty in the deep neural network for lidar 3d
vehicle detection,” in 2018 21st International Conference on Intelligent
Transportation Systems (ITSC).
IEEE, 2018, pp. 3266–3273.
6https://github.com/google/uncertainty-baselines
[8] J. Choi, D. Chun, H. Kim, and H.-J. Lee, “Gaussian yolov3: An
accurate and fast object detector using localization uncertainty for
autonomous driving,” in Proceedings of the IEEE International Con-
ference on Computer Vision, 2019, pp. 502–511.
[9] A. Amini, A. Soleimany, S. Karaman, and D. Rus, “Spatial uncertainty
sampling for end-to-end control,” arXiv preprint arXiv:1805.04829,
2018.
[10] A. Loquercio, M. Segu, and D. Scaramuzza, “A general framework for
uncertainty estimation in deep learning,” IEEE Robotics and Automa-
tion Letters, vol. 5, no. 2, pp. 3153–3160, 2020.
[11] K. Lee, H. Lee, K. Lee, and J. Shin, “Training conﬁdence-calibrated
classiﬁers for detecting out-of-distribution samples,” in International
Conference on Learning Representations, 2018.
[12] J. Mitros and B. Mac Namee, “On the validity of bayesian neural
networks for uncertainty estimation,” arXiv preprint arXiv:1912.01530,
2019.
[13] Y. Ovadia, E. Fertig, J. Ren, Z. Nado, D. Sculley, S. Nowozin, J. Dillon,
B. Lakshminarayanan, and J. Snoek, “Can you trust your model’s
uncertainty? evaluating predictive uncertainty under dataset shift,” in
Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 2019, pp. 13 991–
14 002.
[14] M. S. Ayhan and P. Berens, “Test-time data augmentation for estimation
of heteroscedastic aleatoric uncertainty in deep neural networks,” in
Medical Imaging with Deep Learning Conference, 2018.
[15] C. Guo, G. Pleiss, Y. Sun, and K. Q. Weinberger, “On calibration
of modern neural networks,” in International Conference on Machine
Learning.
PMLR, 2017, pp. 1321–1330.
[16] A. G. Wilson and P. Izmailov, “Bayesian deep learning and a probabilis-
tic perspective of generalization,” in Advances in Neural Information
Processing Systems, H. Larochelle, M. Ranzato, R. Hadsell, M. F.
Balcan, and H. Lin, Eds., vol. 33, 2020, pp. 4697–4708.
[17] M. Rawat, M. Wistuba, and M.-I. Nicolae, “Harnessing model un-
certainty for detecting adversarial examples,” in NIPS Workshop on
Bayesian Deep Learning, 2017.
[18] A. C. Serban, E. Poll, and J. Visser, “Adversarial examples-a complete
characterisation of the phenomenon,” arXiv preprint arXiv:1810.01185,
2018.
[19] L. Smith and Y. Gal, “Understanding measures of uncertainty for
adversarial example detection,” in Proceesings of the Conference on
Uncertainty in Artiﬁcial Intelligence, 2018, pp. 560–569.
[20] Y. Gal and Z. Ghahramani, “Dropout as a bayesian approximation:
Representing model uncertainty in deep learning,” in international
conference on machine learning, 2016, pp. 1050–1059.
[21] M. Rußwurm, S. M. Ali, X. X. Zhu, Y. Gal, and M. K¨orner, “Model and
data uncertainty for satellite time series forecasting with deep recurrent
models,” in 2020 IEEE International Geoscience and Remote Sensing
Symposium (IGARSS), 2020.
[22] J. Gawlikowski, S. Saha, A. Kruspe, and X. X. Zhu, “Out-of-
distribution detection in satellite image classiﬁcation,” in RobustML
workshop at ICLR 2021.
ICRL, 2021, pp. 1–5.
[23] Y. Gal, R. Islam, and Z. Ghahramani, “Deep bayesian active learning
with image data,” in International Conference on Machine Learning.
PMLR, 2017, pp. 1183–1192.
[24] K. Chitta, J. M. Alvarez, and A. Lesnikowski, “Large-scale visual
active learning with deep probabilistic ensembles,” arXiv preprint
arXiv:1811.03575, 2018.
[25] J. Zeng, A. Lesnikowski, and J. M. Alvarez, “The relevance of
bayesian layer positioning to model uncertainty in deep bayesian active
learning,” arXiv preprint arXiv:1811.12535, 2018.
[26] V.-L. Nguyen, S. Destercke, and E. H¨ullermeier, “Epistemic uncer-
tainty sampling,” in International Conference on Discovery Science.
Springer, 2019, pp. 72–86.
[27] W. Huang, J. Zhang, and K. Huang, “Bootstrap estimated uncertainty
of the environment model for model-based reinforcement learning,” in
Proceedings of the AAAI Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence, vol. 33,
2019, pp. 3870–3877.
[28] G. Kahn, A. Villaﬂor, V. Pong, P. Abbeel, and S. Levine, “Uncertainty-
aware reinforcement learning for collision avoidance,” arXiv preprint
arXiv:1702.01182, 2017.
[29] B. L¨otjens, M. Everett, and J. P. How, “Safe reinforcement learning
with model uncertainty estimates,” in 2019 International Conference
on Robotics and Automation (ICRA).
IEEE, 2019, pp. 8662–8668.
[30] C. Blundell, J. Cornebise, K. Kavukcuoglu, and D. Wierstra, “Weight
uncertainty in neural networks,” in Proceedings of the 32nd Interna-
tional Conference on International Conference on Machine Learning-
Volume 37, 2015, pp. 1613–1622.

35
[31] B. Lakshminarayanan, A. Pritzel, and C. Blundell, “Simple and scalable
predictive uncertainty estimation using deep ensembles,” in Advances
in neural information processing systems, 2017, pp. 6402–6413.
[32] A. Malinin and M. Gales, “Predictive uncertainty estimation via prior
networks,” in Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems,
2018, pp. 7047–7058.
[33] X. Zhao, Y. Ou, L. Kaplan, F. Chen, and J.-H. Cho, “Quantifying
classiﬁcation uncertainty using regularized evidential neural networks,”
arXiv preprint arXiv:1910.06864, 2019.
[34] Q. Wu, H. Li, W. Su, L. Li, and Z. Yu, “Quantifying intrinsic
uncertainty in classiﬁcation via deep dirichlet mixture networks,” arXiv
preprint arXiv:1906.04450, 2019.
[35] J. Van Amersfoort, L. Smith, Y. W. Teh, and Y. Gal, “Uncertainty
estimation using a single deep deterministic neural network,” in Pro-
ceedings of the 37th International Conference on Machine Learning.
PMLR, 2020, pp. 9690–9700.
[36] T. Ramalho and M. Miranda, “Density estimation in representation
space to predict model uncertainty,” in Engineering Dependable and
Secure Machine Learning Systems: Third International Workshop,
EDSMLS 2020, New York City, NY, USA, February 7, 2020, Revised
Selected Papers, vol. 1272.
Springer Nature, 2020, p. 84.
[37] A. Mobiny, H. V. Nguyen, S. Moulik, N. Garg, and C. C. Wu,
“Dropconnect is effective in modeling uncertainty of bayesian deep
networks,” arXiv preprint arXiv:1906.04569, 2019.
[38] D.
Krueger,
C.-W.
Huang,
R.
Islam,
R.
Turner,
A.
Lacoste,
and
A.
Courville,
“Bayesian
hypernetworks,”
arXiv
preprint
arXiv:1710.04759, 2017.
[39] M. Valdenegro-Toro, “Deep sub-ensembles for fast uncertainty estima-
tion in image classiﬁcation,” in Bayesian Deep Learning Workshop at
Neural Information Processing Systems 2019, 2019.
[40] Y. Wen, D. Tran, and J. Ba, “Batchensemble: an alternative approach
to efﬁcient ensemble and lifelong learning,” in 8th International
Conference on Learning Representations, 2020.
[41] C. Shorten and T. M. Khoshgoftaar, “A survey on image data augmen-
tation for deep learning,” Journal of Big Data, vol. 6, no. 1, pp. 1–48,
2019.
[42] Q. Wen, L. Sun, X. Song, J. Gao, X. Wang, and H. Xu, “Time
series data augmentation for deep learning: A survey,” arXiv preprint
arXiv:2002.12478, 2020.
[43] T. Tsiligkaridis, “Information robust dirichlet networks for predictive
uncertainty estimation,” arXiv preprint arXiv:1910.04819, 2019.
[44] M. Sensoy, L. Kaplan, and M. Kandemir, “Evidential deep learning to
quantify classiﬁcation uncertainty,” in Advances in Neural Information
Processing Systems, 2018, pp. 3179–3189.
[45] A. Malinin, B. Mlodozeniec, and M. Gales, “Ensemble distribution dis-
tillation,” in 8th International Conference on Learning Representations,
2020.
[46] M. Raghu, K. Blumer, R. Sayres, Z. Obermeyer, B. Kleinberg, S. Mul-
lainathan, and J. Kleinberg, “Direct uncertainty prediction for medical
second opinions,” in International Conference on Machine Learning.
PMLR, 2019, pp. 5281–5290.
[47] J. Wenger, H. Kjellstr¨om, and R. Triebel, “Non-parametric calibration
for classiﬁcation,” in International Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence
and Statistics, 2020, pp. 178–190.
[48] J. Zhang, B. Kailkhura, and T. Y.-J. Han, “Mix-n-match: Ensemble and
compositional methods for uncertainty calibration in deep learning,” in
International Conference on Machine Learning.
PMLR, 2020, pp.
11 117–11 128.
[49] R. Ghanem, D. Higdon, and H. Owhadi, Handbook of uncertainty
quantiﬁcation.
Springer, 2017, vol. 6.
[50] Y. Gal, “Uncertainty in deep learning,” Ph.D. dissertation, University
of Cambridge, 2016.
[51] A. G. Kendall, “Geometry and uncertainty in deep learning for com-
puter vision,” Ph.D. dissertation, University of Cambridge, 2019.
[52] A. Malinin, “Uncertainty estimation in deep learning with application
to spoken language assessment,” Ph.D. dissertation, University of
Cambridge, 2019.
[53] H. Wang and D.-Y. Yeung, “Towards bayesian deep learning: A frame-
work and some existing methods,” IEEE Transactions on Knowledge
and Data Engineering, vol. 28, no. 12, pp. 3395–3408, 2016.
[54] ——, “A survey on bayesian deep learning,” ACM Computing Surveys
(CSUR), vol. 53, no. 5, pp. 1–37, 2020.
[55] N. St˚ahl, G. Falkman, A. Karlsson, and G. Mathiason, “Evaluation
of uncertainty quantiﬁcation in deep learning,” in Information Pro-
cessing and Management of Uncertainty in Knowledge-Based Systems.
Springer International Publishing, 2020, pp. 556–568.
[56] F. K. Gustafsson, M. Danelljan, and T. B. Schon, “Evaluating scalable
bayesian deep learning methods for robust computer vision,” in Pro-
ceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern
Recognition Workshops, 2020, pp. 318–319.
[57] E. H¨ullermeier and W. Waegeman, “Aleatoric and epistemic uncer-
tainty in machine learning: An introduction to concepts and methods,”
Machine Learning, vol. 110, no. 3, pp. 457–506, 2021.
[58] M. Abdar, F. Pourpanah, S. Hussain, D. Rezazadegan, L. Liu,
M. Ghavamzadeh, P. Fieguth, X. Cao, A. Khosravi, U. R. Acharya
et al., “A review of uncertainty quantiﬁcation in deep learning: Tech-
niques, applications and challenges,” Information Fusion, 2021.
[59] P. W. Battaglia, J. B. Hamrick, V. Bapst, A. Sanchez-Gonzalez,
V. Zambaldi, M. Malinowski, A. Tacchetti, D. Raposo, A. Santoro,
R. Faulkner et al., “Relational inductive biases, deep learning, and
graph networks,” arXiv preprint arXiv:1806.01261, 2018.
[60] A. Kendall and Y. Gal, “What uncertainties do we need in bayesian
deep learning for computer vision?” in Advances in neural information
processing systems, 2017, pp. 5574–5584.
[61] Y. Gal and Z. Ghahramani, “Bayesian convolutional neural net-
works with bernoulli approximate variational inference,” arXiv preprint
arXiv:1506.02158, 2015.
[62] C. Bishop, Pattern Recognition and Machine Learning.
Springer-
Verlag New York, 2006.
[63] H. Ritter, A. Botev, and D. Barber, “A scalable laplace approximation
for neural networks,” in 6th International Conference on Learning
Representations, vol. 6.
International Conference on Representation
Learning, 2018.
[64] J. Nandy, W. Hsu, and M. L. Lee, “Towards maximizing the represen-
tation gap between in-domain &amp; out-of-distribution examples,” in
Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, H. Larochelle,
M. Ranzato, R. Hadsell, M. F. Balcan, and H. Lin, Eds., 2020, pp.
9239–9250.
[65] A. Ashukha, A. Lyzhov, D. Molchanov, and D. Vetrov, “Pitfalls of
in-domain uncertainty estimation and ensembling in deep learning,” in
International Conference on Learning Representations, 2020.
[66] T. DeVries and G. W. Taylor, “Improved regularization of convolutional
neural networks with cutout,” arXiv preprint arXiv:1708.04552, 2017.
[67] D. Hendrycks and K. Gimpel, “A baseline for detecting misclassiﬁed
and out-of-distribution examples in neural networks,” in 5th Interna-
tional Conference on Learning Representations, 2017.
[68] S. Liang, Y. Li, and R. Srikant, “Enhancing the reliability of out-of-
distribution image detection in neural networks,” in 6th International
Conference on Learning Representations, 2018.
[69] A. Shafaei, M. Schmidt, and J. J. Little, “A less biased evaluation
of out-of-distribution sample detectors,” in British Machine Vision
Conference 2019, 2019.
[70] M. Mundt, I. Pliushch, S. Majumder, and V. Ramesh, “Open set
recognition through deep neural network uncertainty: Does out-of-
distribution detection require generative classiﬁers?” in Proceedings
of the IEEE International Conference on Computer Vision Workshops,
2019.
[71] P. Oberdiek, M. Rottmann, and H. Gottschalk, “Classiﬁcation uncer-
tainty of deep neural networks based on gradient information,” in
IAPR Workshop on Artiﬁcial Neural Networks in Pattern Recognition.
Springer, 2018, pp. 113–125.
[72] J. Lee and G. AlRegib, “Gradients as a measure of uncertainty in
neural networks,” in 2020 IEEE International Conference on Image
Processing.
IEEE, 2020, pp. 2416–2420.
[73] G. E. Hinton and D. Van Camp, “Keeping the neural networks simple
by minimizing the description length of the weights,” in Proceedings of
the sixth annual conference on Computational learning theory, 1993,
pp. 5–13.
[74] D. Barber and C. M. Bishop, “Ensemble learning in bayesian neural
networks,” Nato ASI Series F Computer and Systems Sciences, vol.
168, pp. 215–238, 1998.
[75] A. Graves, “Practical variational inference for neural networks,” in
Advances in neural information processing systems, 2011, pp. 2348–
2356.
[76] C. Louizos, K. Ullrich, and M. Welling, “Bayesian compression for
deep learning,” in Advances in neural information processing systems,
2017, pp. 3288–3298.
[77] D. Rezende and S. Mohamed, “Variational inference with normalizing
ﬂows,” in International Conference on Machine Learning, 2015, pp.
1530–1538.
[78] R. M. Neal, “Bayesian training of backpropagation networks by the
hybrid monte carlo method,” Citeseer, Tech. Rep., 1992.

36
[79] ——, “An improved acceptance procedure for the hybrid monte carlo
algorithm,” Journal of Computational Physics, vol. 111, no. 1, pp. 194–
203, 1994.
[80] ——, “Bayesian learning for neural networks,” Ph.D. dissertation,
University of Toronto, 1995.
[81] M. Welling and Y. W. Teh, “Bayesian learning via stochastic gradient
langevin dynamics,” in Proceedings of the 28th international confer-
ence on machine learning, 2011, pp. 681–688.
[82] C. Nemeth and P. Fearnhead, “Stochastic gradient markov chain monte
carlo,” Journal of the American Statistical Association, pp. 1–18, 2020.
[83] T. Salimans and D. P. Kingma, “Weight Normalization: A Simple
Reparameterization to Accelerate Training of Deep Neural Networks,”
in Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems 29.
Curran
Associates, Inc., 2016, pp. 901–909.
[84] J. Lee, M. Humt, J. Feng, and R. Triebel, “Estimating model uncer-
tainty of neural networks in sparse information form,” in International
Conference on Machine Learning.
PMLR, 2020, pp. 5702–5713.
[85] O. Achrack, O. Barzilay, and R. Kellerman, “Multi-loss sub-ensembles
for accurate classiﬁcation with uncertainty estimation,” arXiv preprint
arXiv:2010.01917, 2020.
[86] G. Huang, Y. Li, G. Pleiss, Z. Liu, J. E. Hopcroft, and K. Q. Wein-
berger, “Snapshot ensembles: Train 1, get m for free,” in International
conference on learning representations, 2017.
[87] G. D. Cavalcanti, L. S. Oliveira, T. J. Moura, and G. V. Carvalho,
“Combining diversity measures for ensemble pruning,” Pattern Recog-
nition Letters, vol. 74, pp. 38–45, 2016.
[88] H. Guo, H. Liu, R. Li, C. Wu, Y. Guo, and M. Xu, “Margin & diversity
based ordering ensemble pruning,” Neurocomputing, vol. 275, pp. 237–
246, 2018.
[89] W. G. Martinez, “Ensemble pruning via quadratic margin maximiza-
tion,” IEEE Access, vol. 9, pp. 48 931–48 951, 2021.
[90] J. Lindqvist, A. Olmin, F. Lindsten, and L. Svensson, “A general
framework for ensemble distribution distillation,” in 2020 IEEE 30th
International Workshop on Machine Learning for Signal Processing
(MLSP).
IEEE, 2020, pp. 1–6.
[91] D. Molchanov, A. Lyzhov, Y. Molchanova, A. Ashukha, and D. Vetrov,
“Greedy policy search: A simple baseline for learnable test-time
augmentation,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2002.09103, vol. 2, no. 7, 2020.
[92] M. Mo˙zejko, M. Susik, and R. Karczewski, “Inhibited softmax
for
uncertainty
estimation
in
neural
networks,”
arXiv
preprint
arXiv:1810.01861, 2018.
[93] L. Oala, C. Heiß, J. Macdonald, M. M¨arz, W. Samek, and G. Ku-
tyniok, “Interval neural networks: Uncertainty scores,” arXiv preprint
arXiv:2003.11566, 2020.
[94] A. Malinin and M. Gales, “Reverse kl-divergence training of prior net-
works: Improved uncertainty and adversarial robustness,” in Advances
in Neural Information Processing Systems, H. Wallach, H. Larochelle,
A. Beygelzimer, F. d ´Alch´e-Buc, E. Fox, and R. Garnett, Eds., 2019,
pp. 14 547–14 558.
[95] V. T. Vasudevan, A. Sethy, and A. R. Ghias, “Towards better con-
ﬁdence estimation for neural models,” in ICASSP 2019-2019 IEEE
International Conference on Acoustics, Speech and Signal Processing
(ICASSP).
IEEE, 2019, pp. 7335–7339.
[96] M. Hein, M. Andriushchenko, and J. Bitterwolf, “Why relu networks
yield high-conﬁdence predictions far away from the training data and
how to mitigate the problem,” in Proceedings of the IEEE Conference
on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition, 2019, pp. 41–50.
[97] T. Joo, U. Chung, and M.-G. Seo, “Being bayesian about categor-
ical probability,” in International Conference on Machine Learning.
PMLR, 2020, pp. 4950–4961.
[98] T. Tsiligkaridis, “Failure prediction by conﬁdence estimation of
uncertainty-aware dirichlet networks,” in 2021 IEEE International
Conference on Acoustics, Speech and Signal Processing.
IEEE, 2021,
pp. 3525–3529.
[99] ——, “Information robust dirichlet networks for predictive uncertainty
estimation,” arXiv preprint arXiv:1910.04819, 2019.
[100] A. P. Dempster, “A generalization of bayesian inference,” Journal of
the Royal Statistical Society: Series B (Methodological), vol. 30, no. 2,
pp. 205–232, 1968.
[101] A. Amini, W. Schwarting, A. Soleimany, and D. Rus, “Deep evidential
regression,” in Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems,
H. Larochelle, M. Ranzato, R. Hadsell, M. F. Balcan, and H. Lin,
Eds., vol. 33.
Curran Associates, Inc., 2020, pp. 14 927–14 937.
[102] B. Charpentier, D. Z¨ugner, and S. G¨unnemann, “Posterior network:
Uncertainty estimation without ood samples via density-based pseudo-
counts,” in Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems,
H. Larochelle, M. Ranzato, R. Hadsell, M. F. Balcan, and H. Lin,
Eds., vol. 33, 2020, pp. 1356–1367.
[103] N. Tagasovska and D. Lopez-Paz, “Single-model uncertainties for deep
learning,” in Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems,
2019, pp. 6417–6428.
[104] T. Kawashima, Q. Yu, A. Asai, D. Ikami, and K. Aizawa, “The
aleatoric uncertainty estimation using a separate formulation with
virtual residuals,” in 2020 25th International Conference on Pattern
Recognition (ICPR).
IEEE, 2021, pp. 1438–1445.
[105] Y.-C. Hsu, Y. Shen, H. Jin, and Z. Kira, “Generalized odin: Detect-
ing out-of-distribution image without learning from out-of-distribution
data,” in Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision
and Pattern Recognition, 2020, pp. 10 951–10 960.
[106] J. Denker, D. Schwartz, B. Wittner, S. Solla, R. Howard, L. Jackel,
and J. Hopﬁeld, “Large automatic learning, rule extraction, and gener-
alization,” Complex systems, vol. 1, no. 5, pp. 877–922, 1987.
[107] N. Tishby, E. Levin, and S. A. Solla, “Consistent inference of
probabilities in layered networks: Predictions and generalization,” in
International Joint Conference on Neural Networks, vol. 2, 1989, pp.
403–409.
[108] W. L. Buntine and A. S. Weigend, “Bayesian back-propagation,”
Complex systems, vol. 5, no. 6, pp. 603–643, 1991.
[109] D. J. C. MacKay, “Bayesian model comparison and backprop nets,” in
Advances in neural information processing systems, 1992, pp. 839–846.
[110] M.-A. Sato, “Online model selection based on the variational bayes,”
Neural computation, vol. 13, no. 7, pp. 1649–1681, 2001.
[111] A. Corduneanu and C. M. Bishop, “Variational bayesian model selec-
tion for mixture distributions,” in Artiﬁcial intelligence and Statistics,
vol. 2001.
Morgan Kaufmann Waltham, MA, 2001, pp. 27–34.
[112] S. Ghosh, J. Yao, and F. Doshi-Velez, “Model selection in bayesian
neural networks via horseshoe priors,” Journal of Machine Learning
Research, vol. 20, no. 182, pp. 1–46, 2019.
[113] M. Federici, K. Ullrich, and M. Welling, “Improved bayesian compres-
sion,” arXiv preprint arXiv:1711.06494, 2017.
[114] J. Achterhold, J. M. Koehler, A. Schmeink, and T. Genewein, “Varia-
tional network quantization,” in International Conference on Learning
Representations, 2018.
[115] D. J. MacKay, “Information-based objective functions for active data
selection,” Neural computation, vol. 4, no. 4, pp. 590–604, 1992.
[116] A. Kirsch, J. van Amersfoort, and Y. Gal, “Batchbald: Efﬁcient
and diverse batch acquisition for deep bayesian active learning,” in
Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 2019, pp. 7026–
7037.
[117] C. V. Nguyen, Y. Li, T. D. Bui, and R. E. Turner, “Variational continual
learning,” in International Conference on Learning Representations,
2018.
[118] S. Ebrahimi, M. Elhoseiny, T. Darrell, and M. Rohrbach, “Uncertainty-
guided continual learning with bayesian neural networks,” in Interna-
tional Conference on Learning Representations, 2020.
[119] S. Farquhar and Y. Gal, “A unifying bayesian view of continual
learning,” arXiv preprint arXiv:1902.06494, 2019.
[120] H. Li, P. Barnaghi, S. Enshaeifar, and F. Ganz, “Continual learning us-
ing bayesian neural networks,” IEEE Transactions on Neural Networks
and Learning Systems, 2020.
[121] M. E. E. Khan, A. Immer, E. Abedi, and M. Korzepa, “Approximate
inference turns deep networks into gaussian processes,” in Advances
in neural information processing systems, 2019, pp. 3094–3104.
[122] J. S. Denker and Y. LeCun, “Transforming neural-net output levels to
probability distributions,” in Advances in neural information processing
systems, 1991, pp. 853–859.
[123] D. J. MacKay, “A practical bayesian framework for backpropagation
networks,” Neural computation, vol. 4, no. 3, pp. 448–472, 1992.
[124] J. Hernandez-Lobato, Y. Li, M. Rowland, T. Bui, D. Hern´andez-
Lobato, and R. Turner, “Black-box alpha divergence minimization,” in
International Conference on Machine Learning, 2016, pp. 1511–1520.
[125] Y. Li and Y. Gal, “Dropout inference in bayesian neural networks with
alpha-divergences,” in International Conference on Machine Learning,
2017, pp. 2052–2061.
[126] T. Minka et al., “Divergence measures and message passing,” Technical
report, Microsoft Research, Tech. Rep., 2005.
[127] T. P. Minka, “Expectation propagation for approximate bayesian in-
ference,” in Proceedings of the 17th Conference in Uncertainty in
Artiﬁcial Intelligence, 2001, pp. 362–369.
[128] J. Zhao, X. Liu, S. He, and S. Sun, “Probabilistic inference of
bayesian neural networks with generalized expectation propagation,”
Neurocomputing, vol. 412, pp. 392–398, 2020.

37
[129] J. M. Hern´andez-Lobato and R. Adams, “Probabilistic backpropagation
for scalable learning of bayesian neural networks,” in International
Conference on Machine Learning, 2015, pp. 1861–1869.
[130] D. Tran, A. Kucukelbir, A. B. Dieng, M. Rudolph, D. Liang, and D. M.
Blei, “Edward: A library for probabilistic modeling, inference, and
criticism,” arXiv preprint arXiv:1610.09787, 2016.
[131] D. Tran, M. D. Hoffman, R. A. Saurous, E. Brevdo, K. Murphy,
and D. M. Blei, “Deep probabilistic programming,” in International
Conference on Machine Learning, 2016.
[132] E. Bingham, J. P. Chen, M. Jankowiak, F. Obermeyer, N. Pradhan,
T. Karaletsos, R. Singh, P. Szerlip, P. Horsfall, and N. D. Goodman,
“Pyro: Deep universal probabilistic programming,” The Journal of
Machine Learning Research, vol. 20, no. 1, pp. 973–978, 2019.
[133] R. Caba˜nas, A. Salmer´on, and A. R. Masegosa, “Inferpy: Probabilistic
modeling with tensorﬂow made easy,” Knowledge-Based Systems, vol.
168, pp. 25–27, 2019.
[134] Y. Ito, C. Srinivasan, and H. Izumi, “Bayesian learning of neural
networks adapted to changes of prior probabilities,” in International
Conference on Artiﬁcial Neural Networks.
Springer, 2005, pp. 253–
259.
[135] S. Sun, G. Zhang, J. Shi, and R. Grosse, “Functional variational
bayesian neural networks,” in International Conference on Learning
Representations, 2018.
[136] S. Depeweg, J. M. Hern´andez-Lobato, S. Udluft, and T. Runkler,
“Sensitivity analysis for predictive uncertainty in bayesian neural
networks,” arXiv preprint arXiv:1712.03605, 2017.
[137] S. Farquhar, L. Smith, and Y. Gal, “Try depth instead of weight
correlations: Mean-ﬁeld is a less restrictive assumption for deeper
networks,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2002.03704, 2020.
[138] J. Postels, F. Ferroni, H. Coskun, N. Navab, and F. Tombari, “Sampling-
free epistemic uncertainty estimation using approximated variance
propagation,” in Proceedings of the IEEE International Conference on
Computer Vision, 2019, pp. 2931–2940.
[139] J. Gast and S. Roth, “Lightweight probabilistic deep networks,” in
Proceedings of the IEEE Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern
Recognition, 2018, pp. 3369–3378.
[140] S. Depeweg, J.-M. Hernandez-Lobato, F. Doshi-Velez, and S. Udluft,
“Decomposition of uncertainty in bayesian deep learning for efﬁcient
and risk-sensitive learning,” in International Conference on Machine
Learning.
PMLR, 2018, pp. 1184–1193.
[141] ——, “Decomposition of uncertainty in Bayesian deep learning for
efﬁcient and risk-sensitive learning,” in Proceedings of the 35th In-
ternational Conference on Machine Learning, ser. Proceedings of
Machine Learning Research, J. Dy and A. Krause, Eds., vol. 80.
PMLR, 10–15 Jul 2018, pp. 1184–1193.
[142] D. P. Kingma, T. Salimans, and M. Welling, “Variational dropout and
the local reparameterization trick,” in Advances in neural information
processing systems, 2015, pp. 2575–2583.
[143] A. Wu, S. Nowozin, E. Meeds, R. Turner, J. Hern´andez-Lobato, and
A. Gaunt, “Deterministic variational inference for robust bayesian
neural networks,” in 7th International Conference on Learning Rep-
resentations, ICLR 2019, 2019.
[144] C. Louizos and M. Welling, “Structured and efﬁcient variational deep
learning with matrix gaussian posteriors,” in International Conference
on Machine Learning, 2016, pp. 1708–1716.
[145] G. Zhang, S. Sun, D. Duvenaud, and R. Grosse, “Noisy natural gradient
as variational inference,” in International Conference on Machine
Learning, 2018, pp. 5852–5861.
[146] S. Sun, C. Chen, and L. Carin, “Learning structured weight uncertainty
in bayesian neural networks,” in Artiﬁcial Intelligence and Statistics,
2017, pp. 1283–1292.
[147] J. Bae, G. Zhang, and R. Grosse, “Eigenvalue corrected noisy natural
gradient,” arXiv preprint arXiv:1811.12565, 2018.
[148] A. Mishkin, F. Kunstner, D. Nielsen, M. Schmidt, and M. E. Khan,
“Slang: Fast structured covariance approximations for bayesian deep
learning with natural gradient,” in Advances in Neural Information
Processing Systems, 2018, pp. 6245–6255.
[149] C. Louizos and M. Welling, “Multiplicative normalizing ﬂows for
variational bayesian neural networks,” in International Conference on
Machine Learning, 2017, pp. 2218–2227.
[150] K. Osawa, S. Swaroop, M. E. E. Khan, A. Jain, R. Eschenhagen,
R. E. Turner, and R. Yokota, “Practical deep learning with bayesian
principles,” in Advances in neural information processing systems,
2019, pp. 4287–4299.
[151] Y. Gal, J. Hron, and A. Kendall, “Concrete dropout,” in Advances in
neural information processing systems, 2017, pp. 3581–3590.
[152] Z. Eaton-Rosen, F. Bragman, S. Bisdas, S. Ourselin, and M. J. Car-
doso, “Towards safe deep learning: accurately quantifying biomarker
uncertainty in neural network predictions,” in International Conference
on Medical Image Computing and Computer-Assisted Intervention.
Springer, 2018, pp. 691–699.
[153] C. R. N. Tassi, “Bayesian convolutional neural network: Robustly
quantify uncertainty for misclassiﬁcations detection,” in Mediter-
ranean Conference on Pattern Recognition and Artiﬁcial Intelligence.
Springer, 2019, pp. 118–132.
[154] P. McClure and N. Kriegeskorte, “Robustly representing uncer-
tainty through sampling in deep neural networks,” arXiv preprint
arXiv:1611.01639, 2016.
[155] M. Khan, D. Nielsen, V. Tangkaratt, W. Lin, Y. Gal, and A. Srivastava,
“Fast and scalable bayesian deep learning by weight-perturbation in
adam,” in International Conference on Machine Learning.
PMLR,
2018, pp. 2611–2620.
[156] M. E. Khan, Z. Liu, V. Tangkaratt, and Y. Gal, “Vprop: Variational
inference using rmsprop,” in Advances in neural information processing
systems, 2017, pp. 3288–3298.
[157] A. Atanov, A. Ashukha, D. Molchanov, K. Neklyudov, and D. Vetrov,
“Uncertainty estimation via stochastic batch normalization,” in Interna-
tional Symposium on Neural Networks.
Springer, 2019, pp. 261–269.
[158] S. Duane, A. D. Kennedy, B. J. Pendleton, and D. Roweth, “Hybrid
monte carlo,” Physics letters B, vol. 195, no. 2, pp. 216–222, 1987.
[159] R. M. Neal et al., “Mcmc using hamiltonian dynamics,” Handbook of
markov chain monte carlo, vol. 2, no. 11, p. 2, 2011.
[160] K. A. Dubey, S. J. Reddi, S. A. Williamson, B. Poczos, A. J. Smola,
and E. P. Xing, “Variance reduction in stochastic gradient langevin
dynamics,” in Advances in neural information processing systems,
2016, pp. 1154–1162.
[161] B. Leimkuhler and S. Reich, Simulating hamiltonian dynamics.
Cam-
bridge university press, 2004, vol. 14.
[162] P. J. Rossky, J. Doll, and H. Friedman, “Brownian dynamics as smart
monte carlo simulation,” The Journal of Chemical Physics, vol. 69,
no. 10, pp. 4628–4633, 1978.
[163] G. O. Roberts and O. Stramer, “Langevin diffusions and metropolis-
hastings algorithms,” Methodology and computing in applied probabil-
ity, vol. 4, no. 4, pp. 337–357, 2002.
[164] H. Kushner and G. G. Yin, Stochastic approximation and recursive
algorithms and applications.
Springer Science & Business Media,
2003, vol. 35.
[165] I. Goodfellow, Y. Bengio, A. Courville, and Y. Bengio, Deep learning.
MIT press Cambridge, 2016, vol. 1, no. 2.
[166] Y.-A. Ma, T. Chen, and E. Fox, “A complete recipe for stochastic gra-
dient mcmc,” in Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems,
2015, pp. 2917–2925.
[167] G. Marceau-Caron and Y. Ollivier, “Natural langevin dynamics for
neural networks,” in International Conference on Geometric Science
of Information.
Springer, 2017, pp. 451–459.
[168] Z. Nado, J. Snoek, R. B. Grosse, D. Duvenaud, B. Xu, and J. Martens,
“Stochastic gradient langevin dynamics that exploit neural network
structure,” in International Conference on Learning Representations
(Workshop), 2018.
[169] U. Simsekli, R. Badeau, A. T. Cemgil, and G. Richard, “Stochas-
tic quasi-newton langevin monte carlo,” in Proceedings of the 33rd
International Conference on International Conference on Machine
Learning-Volume 48, 2016, pp. 642–651.
[170] Y. Zhang and C. A. Sutton, “Quasi-newton methods for markov chain
monte carlo,” in Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems,
2011, pp. 2393–2401.
[171] T. Fu, L. Luo, and Z. Zhang, “Quasi-newton hamiltonian monte carlo.”
in Conference on Uncertainty in Artiﬁcial Intelligence, 2016.
[172] C. Li, C. Chen, D. Carlson, and L. Carin, “Preconditioned stochastic
gradient langevin dynamics for deep neural networks,” in Proceedings
of the Thirtieth AAAI Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence.
AAAI
Press, 2016, pp. 1788–1794.
[173] S. Ahn, A. K. Balan, and M. Welling, “Bayesian posterior sampling
via stochastic gradient ﬁsher scoring,” in International Conference on
Learning Representations, 2012.
[174] S. Patterson and Y. W. Teh, “Stochastic gradient riemannian langevin
dynamics on the probability simplex,” in Advances in neural informa-
tion processing systems, 2013, pp. 3102–3110.
[175] N. Ye and Z. Zhu, “Stochastic fractional hamiltonian monte carlo,” in
IJCAI, 2018, pp. 3019–3025.
[176] N. Ding, Y. Fang, R. Babbush, C. Chen, R. D. Skeel, and H. Neven,
“Bayesian sampling using stochastic gradient thermostats,” in Advances
in neural information processing systems, 2014, pp. 3203–3211.

38
[177] X. Shang, Z. Zhu, B. Leimkuhler, and A. J. Storkey, “Covariance-
controlled adaptive langevin thermostat for large-scale bayesian sam-
pling,” in Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 2015,
pp. 37–45.
[178] B. Leimkuhler and X. Shang, “Adaptive thermostats for noisy gradient
systems,” SIAM Journal on Scientiﬁc Computing, vol. 38, no. 2, pp.
A712–A736, 2016.
[179] S. Ahn, B. Shahbaba, and M. Welling, “Distributed stochastic gradient
mcmc,” in International conference on machine learning, 2014, pp.
1044–1052.
[180] K.-C. Wang, P. Vicol, J. Lucas, L. Gu, R. Grosse, and R. Zemel,
“Adversarial distillation of bayesian neural network posteriors,” in
International Conference on Machine Learning, 2018, pp. 5190–5199.
[181] A. K. Balan, V. Rathod, K. P. Murphy, and M. Welling, “Bayesian dark
knowledge,” in Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems,
2015, pp. 3438–3446.
[182] D. Zou, P. Xu, and Q. Gu, “Stochastic variance-reduced hamilton monte
carlo methods,” in International Conference on Machine Learning,
2018, pp. 6028–6037.
[183] A. Durmus, U. Simsekli, E. Moulines, R. Badeau, and G. Richard,
“Stochastic gradient richardson-romberg markov chain monte carlo,” in
Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 2016, pp. 2047–
2055.
[184] A. Durmus, E. Moulines et al., “High-dimensional bayesian inference
via the unadjusted langevin algorithm,” Bernoulli, vol. 25, no. 4A, pp.
2854–2882, 2019.
[185] I. Sato and H. Nakagawa, “Approximation analysis of stochastic
gradient langevin dynamics by using fokker-planck equation and ito
process,” in International Conference on Machine Learning, 2014, pp.
982–990.
[186] C. Chen, N. Ding, and L. Carin, “On the convergence of stochastic
gradient mcmc algorithms with high-order integrators,” in Advances in
Neural Information Processing Systems, 2015, pp. 2278–2286.
[187] Y. W. Teh, A. H. Thiery, and S. J. Vollmer, “Consistency and ﬂuc-
tuations for stochastic gradient langevin dynamics,” The Journal of
Machine Learning Research, vol. 17, no. 1, pp. 193–225, 2016.
[188] C. Li, A. Stevens, C. Chen, Y. Pu, Z. Gan, and L. Carin, “Learning
weight uncertainty with stochastic gradient mcmc for shape classiﬁca-
tion,” in Proceedings of the IEEE Conference on Computer Vision and
Pattern Recognition, 2016, pp. 5666–5675.
[189] F. Wenzel, K. Roth, B. Veeling, J. Swiatkowski, L. Tran, S. Mandt,
J. Snoek, T. Salimans, R. Jenatton, and S. Nowozin, “How good is
the bayes posterior in deep neural networks really?” in International
Conference on Machine Learning.
PMLR, 2020, pp. 10 248–10 259.
[190] N. Ye, Z. Zhu, and R. K. Mantiuk, “Langevin dynamics with continuous
tempering for training deep neural networks,” in Proceedings of the 31st
International Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems,
2017, pp. 618–626.
[191] R. Chandra, K. Jain, R. V. Deo, and S. Cripps, “Langevin-gradient
parallel tempering for bayesian neural learning,” Neurocomputing, vol.
359, pp. 315–326, 2019.
[192] A. Botev, H. Ritter, and D. Barber, “Practical gauss-newton optimi-
sation for deep learning,” in Proceedings of the 34th International
Conference on Machine Learning-Volume 70, 2017, pp. 557–565.
[193] J. Martens and R. Grosse, “Optimizing neural networks with kronecker-
factored approximate curvature,” in Proceeding of the 32nd Interna-
tional conference on machine learning, 2015, pp. 2408–2417.
[194] S. Becker and Y. LeCun, “Improving the convergence of back-
propagation learning with second-order methods,” in Proceedings of the
1988 Connectionist Models Summer School, San Mateo, D. Touretzky,
G. Hinton, and T. Sejnowski, Eds.
Morgan Kaufmann, 1989, pp.
29–37.
[195] D. C. Liu and J. Nocedal, “On the limited memory bfgs method for
large scale optimization,” Mathematical Programming, vol. 45, pp.
503–528, 08 1989.
[196] P. Hennig, “Fast probabilistic optimization from noisy gradients,”
in Proceedings of the 30th International Conference on Machine
Learning, vol. 28-1.
PMLR, 2013, pp. 62–70.
[197] N. L. Roux and A. W. Fitzgibbon, “A fast natural newton method,”
in Proceedings of the International Conference on Machine Learning,
2010.
[198] R. B. Grosse and J. Martens, “A kronecker-factored approximate ﬁsher
matrix for convolution layers,” in Proceedings of the 33nd International
Conference on Machine Learning, 2016, pp. 573–582.
[199] S.-W. Chen, C.-N. Chou, and E. Chang, “Bda-pch: Block-diagonal ap-
proximation of positive-curvature hessian for training neural networks,”
CoRR, abs/1802.06502, 2018.
[200] J. Ba, R. Grosse, and J. Martens, “Distributed second-order opti-
mization using kronecker-factored approximations,” in International
Conference on Learning Representations, 2017.
[201] T. George, C. Laurent, X. Bouthillier, N. Ballas, and P. Vincent,
“Fast approximate natural gradient descent in a kronecker factored
eigenbasis,” in Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems,
2018, pp. 9573–9583.
[202] Y. LeCun, J. S. Denker, and S. A. Solla, “Optimal brain damage,”
in Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems 2, 1990, pp.
598–605.
[203] J. Kirkpatrick, R. Pascanu, N. Rabinowitz, J. Veness, G. Desjardins,
A. A. Rusu, K. Milan, J. Quan, T. Ramalho, A. Grabska-Barwinska
et al., “Overcoming catastrophic forgetting in neural networks,” Pro-
ceedings of the national academy of sciences, vol. 114, no. 13, pp.
3521–3526, 2017.
[204] A. Kristiadi, M. Hein, and P. Hennig, “Being bayesian, even just a bit,
ﬁxes overconﬁdence in relu networks,” in International Conference on
Machine Learning.
PMLR, 2020, pp. 5436–5446.
[205] M. Humt, J. Lee, and R. Triebel, “Bayesian optimization meets
laplace approximation for robotic introspection,” arXiv preprint
arXiv:2010.16141, 2020.
[206] A. Kristiadi, M. Hein, and P. Hennig, “Learnable uncertainty under
laplace approximations,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2010.02720, 2020.
[207] K. Shinde, J. Lee, M. Humt, A. Sezgin, and R. Triebel, “Learning
multiplicative interactions with bayesian neural networks for visual-
inertial odometry,” in Workshop on AI for Autonomous Driving at the
37th International Conference on Machine Learning, 2020.
[208] J. Feng, M. Durner, Z.-C. Marton, F. Balint-Benczedi, and R. Triebel,
“Introspective robot perception using smoothed predictions from
bayesian neural networks,” in International Symposium on Robotics
Research, 2019.
[209] A. Y. Foong, Y. Li, J. M. Hern´andez-Lobato, and R. E. Turner, “’in-
between’ uncertainty in bayesian neural networks,” arXiv preprint
arXiv:1906.11537, 2019.
[210] A. Immer, M. Korzepa, and M. Bauer, “Improving predictions of
bayesian neural nets via local linearization,” in Proceedings of The
24th International Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence and Statistics.
PMLR, 2021, pp. 703–711.
[211] M. Hobbhahn, A. Kristiadi, and P. Hennig, “Fast predictive uncer-
tainty for classiﬁcation with bayesian deep networks,” arXiv preprint
arXiv:2003.01227, 2020.
[212] E. Daxberger, E. Nalisnick, J. U. Allingham, J. Antor´an, and J. M.
Hern´andez-Lobato, “Expressive yet tractable bayesian deep learning
via subnetwork inference,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2010.14689, 2020.
[213] W. J. Maddox, P. Izmailov, T. Garipov, D. P. Vetrov, and A. G. Wilson,
“A simple baseline for bayesian uncertainty in deep learning,” in
Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 2019, pp. 13 153–
13 164.
[214] J. Mukhoti, P. Stenetorp, and Y. Gal, “On the importance of strong
baselines in bayesian deep learning,” arXiv preprint arXiv:1811.09385,
2018.
[215] A. Filos, S. Farquhar, A. N. Gomez, T. G. Rudner, Z. Kenton, L. Smith,
M. Alizadeh, A. de Kroon, and Y. Gal, “A systematic comparison of
bayesian deep learning robustness in diabetic retinopathy tasks,” arXiv
preprint arXiv:1912.10481, 2019.
[216] J. Mukhoti and Y. Gal, “Evaluating bayesian deep learning methods
for semantic segmentation,” arXiv preprint arXiv:1811.12709, 2018.
[217] O. Sagi and L. Rokach, “Ensemble learning: A survey,” WIREs Data
Mining and Knowledge Discovery, vol. 8, no. 4, p. e1249, 2018.
[218] L. K. Hansen and P. Salamon, “Neural network ensembles,” IEEE
transactions on pattern analysis and machine intelligence, vol. 12,
no. 10, pp. 993–1001, 1990.
[219] Y. Cao, T. A. Geddes, J. Y. H. Yang, and P. Yang, “Ensemble deep
learning in bioinformatics,” Nature Machine Intelligence, pp. 1–9,
2020.
[220] L. Nannia, S. Ghidoni, and S. Brahnam, “Ensemble of convolutional
neural networks for bioimage classiﬁcation,” Applied Computing and
Informatics, 2020.
[221] L. Wei, S. Wan, J. Guo, and K. K. Wong, “A novel hierarchical
selective ensemble classiﬁer with bioinformatics application,” Artiﬁcial
intelligence in medicine, vol. 83, pp. 82–90, 2017.
[222] F. Lv, M. Han, and T. Qiu, “Remote sensing image classiﬁcation based
on ensemble extreme learning machine with stacked autoencoder,”
IEEE Access, vol. 5, pp. 9021–9031, 2017.
[223] X. Dai, X. Wu, B. Wang, and L. Zhang, “Semisupervised scene classi-
ﬁcation for remote sensing images: A method based on convolutional

39
neural networks and ensemble learning,” IEEE Geoscience and Remote
Sensing Letters, vol. 16, no. 6, pp. 869–873, 2019.
[224] E. Marushko and A. Doudkin, “Methods of using ensembles of
heterogeneous models to identify remote sensing objects,” Pattern
Recognition and Image Analysis, vol. 30, no. 2, pp. 211–216, 2020.
[225] T. Kurutach, I. Clavera, Y. Duan, A. Tamar, and P. Abbeel, “Model-
ensemble trust-region policy optimization,” in International Conference
on Learning Representations, 2018.
[226] A. Rajeswaran, S. Ghotra, B. Ravindran, and S. Levine, “Epopt:
Learning robust neural network policies using model ensembles,” in
International Conference on Learning Representations, 2017.
[227] S. Fort, H. Hu, and B. Lakshminarayanan, “Deep ensembles: A loss
landscape perspective,” arXiv preprint arXiv:1912.02757, 2019.
[228] A. Renda, M. Barsacchi, A. Bechini, and F. Marcelloni, “Comparing
ensemble strategies for deep learning: An application to facial expres-
sion recognition,” Expert Systems with Applications, vol. 136, pp. 1–11,
2019.
[229] E. J. Herron, S. R. Young, and T. E. Potok, “Ensembles of networks
produced from neural architecture search,” in International Conference
on High Performance Computing.
Springer, 2020, pp. 223–234.
[230] S. Lee, S. Purushwalkam, M. Cogswell, D. Crandall, and D. Batra,
“Why m heads are better than one: Training a diverse ensemble of
deep networks,” arXiv preprint arXiv:1511.06314, 2015.
[231] I. E. Livieris, L. Iliadis, and P. Pintelas, “On ensemble techniques
of weight-constrained neural networks,” Evolving Systems, pp. 1–13,
2020.
[232] L. Nanni, S. Brahnam, and G. Maguolo, “Data augmentation for
building an ensemble of convolutional neural networks,” in Innovation
in Medicine and Healthcare Systems, and Multimedia.
Singapore:
Springer Singapore, 2019, pp. 61–69.
[233] J. Guo and S. Gould, “Deep cnn ensemble with data augmentation for
object detection,” arXiv preprint arXiv:1506.07224, 2015.
[234] R. Rahaman and A. H. Thiery, “Uncertainty quantiﬁcation and deep
ensembles,” stat, vol. 1050, p. 20, 2020.
[235] Y. Wen, G. Jerfel, R. Muller, M. W. Dusenberry, J. Snoek, B. Lakshmi-
narayanan, and D. Tran, “Combining ensembles and data augmentation
can harm your calibration,” in International Conference on Learning
Representations, 2021.
[236] W. Kim, B. Goyal, K. Chawla, J. Lee, and K. Kwon, “Attention-based
ensemble for deep metric learning,” in Proceedings of the European
Conference on Computer Vision, 2018.
[237] J. Yang and F. Wang, “Auto-ensemble: An adaptive learning rate
scheduling based deep learning model ensembling,” IEEE Access,
vol. 8, pp. 217 499–217 509, 2020.
[238] M. Leutbecher and T. N. Palmer, “Ensemble forecasting,” Journal of
computational physics, vol. 227, no. 7, pp. 3515–3539, 2008.
[239] W. S. Parker, “Ensemble modeling, uncertainty and robust predictions,”
Wiley Interdisciplinary Reviews: Climate Change, vol. 4, no. 3, pp.
213–223, 2013.
[240] W. H. Beluch, T. Genewein, A. N¨urnberger, and J. M. K¨ohler, “The
power of ensembles for active learning in image classiﬁcation,” in
Proceedings of the IEEE Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern
Recognition, 2018, pp. 9368–9377.
[241] A. Vyas, N. Jammalamadaka, X. Zhu, D. Das, B. Kaul, and T. L.
Willke, “Out-of-distribution detection using an ensemble of self super-
vised leave-out classiﬁers,” in Proceedings of the European Conference
on Computer Vision, 2018, pp. 550–564.
[242] J. Koci´c, N. Joviˇci´c, and V. Drndarevi´c, “An end-to-end deep neural
network for autonomous driving designed for embedded automotive
platforms,” Sensors, vol. 19, no. 9, p. 2064, 2019.
[243] G. Mart´ınez-Mu˜noz, D. Hern´andez-Lobato, and A. Su´arez, “An anal-
ysis of ensemble pruning techniques based on ordered aggregation,”
IEEE Transactions on Pattern Analysis and Machine Intelligence,
vol. 31, no. 2, pp. 245–259, 2008.
[244] C. Buciluˇa, R. Caruana, and A. Niculescu-Mizil, “Model compression,”
in Proceedings of the 12th ACM SIGKDD international conference on
Knowledge discovery and data mining, 2006, pp. 535–541.
[245] G. Hinton, O. Vinyals, and J. Dean, “Distilling the knowledge in a
neural network,” stat, vol. 1050, p. 9, 2015.
[246] E. Englesson and H. Azizpour, “Efﬁcient evaluation-time uncertainty
estimation by improved distillation,” in Workshop on Uncertainty and
Robustness in Deep Learning at International Conference on Machine
Learning, 2019.
[247] S. Reich, D. Mueller, and N. Andrews, “Ensemble distillation for
structured prediction: Calibrated, accurate, fast—choose three,” in
Proceedings of the 2020 Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural
Language Processing (EMNLP), 2020, pp. 5583–5595.
[248] G. Wang, W. Li, S. Ourselin, and T. Vercauteren, “Automatic brain
tumor segmentation using convolutional neural networks with test-
time augmentation,” in International MICCAI Brainlesion Workshop.
Springer, 2018, pp. 61–72.
[249] G. Wang, W. Li, M. Aertsen, J. Deprest, S. Ourselin, and T. Ver-
cauteren, “Aleatoric uncertainty estimation with test-time augmentation
for medical image segmentation with convolutional neural networks,”
Neurocomputing, vol. 338, pp. 34–45, 2019.
[250] N. Moshkov, B. Mathe, A. Kertesz-Farkas, R. Hollandi, and P. Horvath,
“Test-time augmentation for deep learning-based cell segmentation on
microscopy images,” Scientiﬁc reports, vol. 10, no. 1, pp. 1–7, 2020.
[251] O. Ronneberger, P. Fischer, and T. Brox, “U-net: Convolutional net-
works for biomedical image segmentation,” in International Confer-
ence on Medical image computing and computer-assisted intervention.
Springer, 2015, pp. 234–241.
[252] D. Shanmugam, D. Blalock, G. Balakrishnan, and J. Guttag, “When and
why test-time augmentation works,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2011.11156,
2020.
[253] I. Kim, Y. Kim, and S. Kim, “Learning loss for test-time augmentation,”
in Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 2020, pp.
4163–4174.
[254] Q. Yu and K. Aizawa, “Unsupervised out-of-distribution detection
by maximum classiﬁer discrepancy,” in Proceedings of the IEEE
International Conference on Computer Vision, 2019, pp. 9518–9526.
[255] J. Ren, P. J. Liu, E. Fertig, J. Snoek, R. Poplin, M. Depristo, J. Dillon,
and B. Lakshminarayanan, “Likelihood ratios for out-of-distribution
detection,” in Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems,
2019, pp. 14 707–14 718.
[256] J. Yao, W. Pan, S. Ghosh, and F. Doshi-Velez, “Quality of uncertainty
quantiﬁcation for bayesian neural network inference,” arXiv preprint
arXiv:1906.09686, 2019.
[257] X. Huang, J. Yang, L. Li, H. Deng, B. Ni, and Y. Xu, “Evaluating
and boosting uncertainty quantiﬁcation in classiﬁcation,” arXiv preprint
arXiv:1909.06030, 2019.
[258] J. Davis and M. Goadrich, “The relationship between precision-recall
and roc curves,” in Proceedings of the 23rd international conference
on Machine learning, 2006, pp. 233–240.
[259] T. Pearce, A. Brintrup, M. Zaki, and A. Neely, “High-quality prediction
intervals for deep learning: A distribution-free, ensembled approach,”
in International Conference on Machine Learning.
PMLR, 2018, pp.
4075–4084.
[260] D. Su, Y. Y. Ting, and J. Ansel, “Tight prediction intervals using
expanded interval minimization,” arXiv preprint arXiv:1806.11222,
2018.
[261] P. McClure, N. Rho, J. A. Lee, J. R. Kaczmarzyk, C. Y. Zheng, S. S.
Ghosh, D. M. Nielson, A. G. Thomas, P. Bandettini, and F. Pereira,
“Knowing what you know in brain segmentation using bayesian deep
neural networks,” Frontiers in neuroinformatics, vol. 13, p. 67, 2019.
[262] A. P. Soleimany, H. Suresh, J. J. G. Ortiz, D. Shanmugam, N. Gural,
J. Guttag, and S. N. Bhatia, “Image segmentation of liver stage
malaria infection with spatial uncertainty sampling,” arXiv preprint
arXiv:1912.00262, 2019.
[263] R. D. Soberanis-Mukul, N. Navab, and S. Albarqouni, “Uncertainty-
based graph convolutional networks for organ segmentation reﬁne-
ment,” in Medical Imaging with Deep Learning.
PMLR, 2020, pp.
755–769.
[264] P. Seebock, J. I. Orlando, T. Schlegl, S. M. Waldstein, H. Bogunovic,
S. Klimscha, G. Langs, and U. Schmidt-Erfurth, “Exploiting epistemic
uncertainty of anatomy segmentation for anomaly detection in retinal
oct,” IEEE Transactions on Medical Imaging, vol. 39, p. 87–98, 2020.
[265] V. Kuleshov, N. Fenner, and S. Ermon, “Accurate uncertainties for deep
learning using calibrated regression,” in International Conference on
Machine Learning.
PMLR, 2018, pp. 2796–2804.
[266] S. Seo, P. H. Seo, and B. Han, “Learning for single-shot conﬁdence
calibration in deep neural networks through stochastic inferences,” in
Proceedings of the IEEE Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern
Recognition, 2019, pp. 9030–9038.
[267] Z. Li and D. Hoiem, “Improving conﬁdence estimates for unfamiliar
examples,” in Proceedings of the IEEE Conference on Computer Vision
and Pattern Recognition, 2020, pp. 2686–2695.
[268] C. Szegedy, V. Vanhoucke, S. Ioffe, J. Shlens, and Z. Wojna, “Rethink-
ing the inception architecture for computer vision,” in Proceedings of
the IEEE conference on computer vision and pattern recognition, 2016,
pp. 2818–2826.
[269] G. Pereyra, G. Tucker, J. Chorowski, Ł. Kaiser, and G. Hinton, “Regu-
larizing neural networks by penalizing conﬁdent output distributions,”
arXiv preprint arXiv:1701.06548, 2017.

40
[270] R. M¨uller, S. Kornblith, and G. E. Hinton, “When does label smoothing
help?” in Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 2019,
pp. 4694–4703.
[271] B.
Venkatesh
and
J.
J.
Thiagarajan,
“Heteroscedastic
calibra-
tion of uncertainty estimators in deep learning,” arXiv preprint
arXiv:1910.14179, 2019.
[272] P. Izmailov, W. J. Maddox, P. Kirichenko, T. Garipov, D. Vetrov, and
A. G. Wilson, “Subspace inference for bayesian deep learning,” in
Uncertainty in Artiﬁcial Intelligence.
PMLR, 2020, pp. 1169–1179.
[273] Z. Zhang, A. V. Dalca, and M. R. Sabuncu, “Conﬁdence calibration for
convolutional neural networks using structured dropout,” arXiv preprint
arXiv:1906.09551, 2019.
[274] M.-H. Laves, S. Ihler, K.-P. Kortmann, and T. Ortmaier, “Well-
calibrated model uncertainty with temperature scaling for dropout
variational inference,” arXiv preprint arXiv:1909.13550, 2019.
[275] A. Mehrtash, W. M. Wells, C. M. Tempany, P. Abolmaesumi, and
T. Kapur, “Conﬁdence calibration and predictive uncertainty estimation
for deep medical image segmentation,” IEEE Transactions on Medical
Imaging, 2020.
[276] B. Zadrozny and C. Elkan, “Obtaining calibrated probability estimates
from decision trees and naive bayesian classiﬁers,” in International
Conference on Machine Learning, vol. 1.
Citeseer, 2001, pp. 609–
616.
[277] D. Hendrycks, M. Mazeika, and T. Dietterich, “Deep anomaly detec-
tion with outlier exposure,” in International Conference on Learning
Representations, 2019.
[278] S. Thulasidasan, G. Chennupati, J. A. Bilmes, T. Bhattacharya, and
S. Michalak, “On mixup training: Improved calibration and predictive
uncertainty for deep neural networks,” in Advances in Neural Informa-
tion Processing Systems, 2019, pp. 13 888–13 899.
[279] J. Maro˜nas, D. Ramos, and R. Paredes, “Improving calibration in
mixup-trained deep neural networks through conﬁdence-based loss
functions,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2003.09946, 2020.
[280] K. Patel, W. Beluch, D. Zhang, M. Pfeiffer, and B. Yang, “On-manifold
adversarial data augmentation improves uncertainty calibration,” in
2020 25th International Conference on Pattern Recognition (ICPR).
IEEE, 2021, pp. 8029–8036.
[281] D. Comaniciu, V. Ramesh, and P. Meer, “Real-time tracking of non-
rigid objects using mean shift,” in Proceedings IEEE Conference on
Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition, vol. 2.
IEEE, 2000, pp.
142–149.
[282] H. Zhang, M. Cisse, Y. N. Dauphin, and D. Lopez-Paz, “mixup: Beyond
empirical risk minimization,” in International Conference on Learning
Representations, 2018.
[283] M. P. Naeini, G. F. Cooper, and M. Hauskrecht, “Obtaining well
calibrated probabilities using bayesian binning,” in Proceedings of the
AAAI Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence, vol. 2015, 2015, p. 2901.
[284] M. Kull, M. Perell´o-Nieto, M. K¨angsepp, T. de Menezes e Silva Filho,
H. Song, and P. A. Flach, “Beyond temperature scaling: Obtaining
well-calibrated multi-class probabilities with dirichlet calibration,” in
Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 2019, pp. 12 295–
12 305.
[285] D. Levi, L. Gispan, N. Giladi, and E. Fetaya, “Evaluating and cal-
ibrating uncertainty prediction in regression tasks,” arXiv preprint
arXiv:1905.11659, 2019.
[286] J. Vaicenavicius, D. Widmann, C. Andersson, F. Lindsten, J. Roll,
and T. Sch¨on, “Evaluating model calibration in classiﬁcation,” in The
22nd International Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence and Statistics.
PMLR, 2019, pp. 3459–3467.
[287] M. H. DeGroot and S. E. Fienberg, “The comparison and evaluation
of forecasters,” Journal of the Royal Statistical Society: Series D (The
Statistician), vol. 32, no. 1-2, pp. 12–22, 1983.
[288] J. Nixon, M. W. Dusenberry, L. Zhang, G. Jerfel, and D. Tran,
“Measuring calibration in deep learning,” in CVPR Workshops, 2019,
pp. 38–41.
[289] A. Ghandeharioun, B. Eoff, B. Jou, and R. Picard, “Characterizing
sources of uncertainty to proxy calibration and disambiguate annota-
tor and data bias,” in 2019 IEEE/CVF International Conference on
Computer Vision Workshop.
IEEE, 2019, pp. 4202–4206.
[290] F. J. Pulgar, A. J. Rivera, F. Charte, and M. J. del Jesus, “On the impact
of imbalanced data in convolutional neural networks performance,”
in International Conference on Hybrid Artiﬁcial Intelligence Systems.
Springer, 2017, pp. 220–232.
[291] K. Lee, K. Lee, H. Lee, and J. Shin, “A simple uniﬁed framework
for detecting out-of-distribution samples and adversarial attacks,” in
Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 2018, pp. 7167–
7177.
[292] M. L. Iuzzolino, T. Umada, N. R. Ahmed, and D. A. Szaﬁr, “In
automation we trust: Investigating the role of uncertainty in active
learning systems,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2004.00762, 2020.
[293] B. Settles, “Active learning literature survey,” University of Wisconsin-
Madison Department of Computer Sciences, Tech. Rep., 2009.
[294] R. Pop and P. Fulop, “Deep ensemble bayesian active learning:
Addressing the mode collapse issue in monte carlo dropout via en-
sembles,” arXiv preprint arXiv:1811.03897, 2018.
[295] M. Ghavamzadeh, S. Mannor, J. Pineau, and A. Tamar, “Bayesian re-
inforcement learning: A survey,” Foundations and Trends® in Machine
Learning, vol. 8, no. 5-6, pp. 359–483, 2015.
[296] S. Hu, D. Worrall, S. Knegt, B. Veeling, H. Huisman, and M. Welling,
“Supervised uncertainty quantiﬁcation for segmentation with multiple
annotations,” in International Conference on Medical Image Computing
and Computer-Assisted Intervention.
Springer, 2019, pp. 137–145.
[297] F. C. Ghesu, B. Georgescu, E. Gibson, S. Guendel, M. K. Kalra,
R. Singh, S. R. Digumarthy, S. Grbic, and D. Comaniciu, “Quantifying
and leveraging classiﬁcation uncertainty for chest radiograph assess-
ment,” in International Conference on Medical Image Computing and
Computer-Assisted Intervention.
Springer, 2019, pp. 676–684.
[298] M. S. Ayhan, L. Kuehlewein, G. Aliyeva, W. Inhoffen, F. Ziemssen,
and P. Berens, “Expert-validated estimation of diagnostic uncertainty
for deep neural networks in diabetic retinopathy detection,” Medical
Image Analysis, p. 101724, 2020.
[299] N. Sunderhauf, O. Brock, W. Scheirer, R. Hadsell, D. Fox, J. Leitner,
B. Upcroft, P. Abbeel, W. Burgard, M. Milford et al., “The limits and
potentials of deep learning for robotics,” The International Journal of
Robotics Research, vol. 37, no. 4-5, pp. 405–420, 2018.
[300] S. Thrun, “Probabilistic robotics,” Communications of the ACM,
vol. 45, no. 3, pp. 52–57, 2002.
[301] D. Fox, “Markov localization-a probabilistic framework for mobile
robot localization and navigation.” Ph.D. dissertation, Citeseer, 1998.
[302] D. Fox, W. Burgard, H. Kruppa, and S. Thrun, “A probabilistic
approach to collaborative multi-robot localization,” Autonomous robots,
vol. 8, no. 3, pp. 325–344, 2000.
[303] S. Thrun, D. Fox, W. Burgard, and F. Dellaert, “Robust monte carlo
localization for mobile robots,” Artiﬁcial intelligence, vol. 128, no. 1-2,
pp. 99–141, 2001.
[304] H. Durrant-Whyte and T. Bailey, “Simultaneous localization and map-
ping: part i,” IEEE robotics & automation magazine, vol. 13, no. 2,
pp. 99–110, 2006.
[305] T. Bailey and H. Durrant-Whyte, “Simultaneous localization and map-
ping (slam): Part ii,” IEEE robotics & automation magazine, vol. 13,
no. 3, pp. 108–117, 2006.
[306] M. Montemerlo, S. Thrun, D. Koller, and B. Wegbreit, “Fastslam:
A factored solution to the simultaneous localization and mapping
problem,” Aaai/iaai, vol. 593598, 2002.
[307] M. Kaess, V. Ila, R. Roberts, and F. Dellaert, “The bayes tree: An
algorithmic foundation for probabilistic robot mapping,” in Algorithmic
Foundations of Robotics IX.
Springer, 2010, pp. 157–173.
[308] F. Dellaert and M. Kaess, “Factor graphs for robot perception,”
Foundations and Trends in Robotics, vol. 6, no. 1-2, pp. 1–139, 2017.
[309] H. A. Loeliger, “An introduction to factor graphs,” IEEE Signal
Processing Magazine, vol. 21, no. 1, pp. 28–41, 2004.
[310] D. Silver and J. Veness, “Monte-carlo planning in large pomdps,” in
Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 2010.
[311] S. Ross, J. Pineau, S. Paquet, and B. Chaib-Draa, “Online planning
algorithms for pomdps,” Journal of Artiﬁcial Intelligence Research,
vol. 32, pp. 663–704, 2008.
[312] S. M. Richards, F. Berkenkamp, and A. Krause, “The lyapunov neural
network: Adaptive stability certiﬁcation for safe learning of dynamical
systems,” in Conference on Robot Learning.
PMLR, 2018, pp. 466–
476.
[313] F. Berkenkamp, A. P. Schoellig, and A. Krause, “Safe controller
optimization for quadrotors with gaussian processes,” in 2016 IEEE
International Conference on Robotics and Automation (ICRA).
IEEE,
2016, pp. 491–496.
[314] F. Berkenkamp, M. Turchetta, A. P. Schoellig, and A. Krause, “Safe
model-based reinforcement learning with stability guarantees,” in Ad-
vances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 2017.
[315] H. Grimmett, R. Triebel, R. Paul, and I. Posner, “Introspective clas-
siﬁcation for robot perception,” The International Journal of Robotics
Research, vol. 35, no. 7, pp. 743–762, 2016.
[316] R. Bajcsy, “Active perception,” Proceedings of the IEEE, vol. 76, no. 8,
pp. 966–1005, 1988.

41
[317] R. Triebel, H. Grimmett, R. Paul, and I. Posner, “Driven learning for
driving: How introspection improves semantic mapping,” in Robotics
Research.
Springer, 2016, pp. 449–465.
[318] A. Narr, R. Triebel, and D. Cremers, “Stream-based active learning
for efﬁcient and adaptive classiﬁcation of 3d objects,” in 2016 IEEE
International Conference on Robotics and Automation.
IEEE, 2016,
pp. 227–233.
[319] D. A. Cohn, Z. Ghahramani, and M. I. Jordan, “Active learning with
statistical models,” Journal of artiﬁcial intelligence research, vol. 4,
pp. 129–145, 1996.
[320] A. Nguyen, J. Yosinski, and J. Clune, “Deep neural networks are easily
fooled: High conﬁdence predictions for unrecognizable images,” in
Proceedings of the IEEE conference on computer vision and pattern
recognition, 2015, pp. 427–436.
[321] K. Wong, S. Wang, M. Ren, M. Liang, and R. Urtasun, “Identifying
unknown instances for autonomous driving,” in Conference on Robot
Learning.
PMLR, 2020, pp. 384–393.
[322] W. Boerdijk, M. Sundermeyer, M. Durner, and R. Triebel, “”What’s
this?”–learning to segment unknown objects from manipulation se-
quences,” in Intern. Conf. on Robotics and Automation, 2021.
[323] C. Richter and N. Roy, “Safe visual navigation via deep learning and
novelty detection,” Robotics: Science and Systems Foundation, 2017.
[324] V. Peretroukhin, M. Giamou, D. M. Rosen, W. N. Greene, N. Roy,
and J. Kelly, “A smooth representation of belief over so (3) for deep
rotation learning with uncertainty,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2006.01031,
2020.
[325] B. L¨utjens, M. Everett, and J. P. How, “Safe reinforcement learning
with model uncertainty estimates,” in 2019 International Conference
on Robotics and Automation.
IEEE, 2019, pp. 8662–8668.
[326] G. Kahn, A. Villaﬂor, B. Ding, P. Abbeel, and S. Levine, “Self-
supervised deep reinforcement learning with generalized computation
graphs for robot navigation,” in 2018 IEEE International Conference
on Robotics and Automation (ICRA).
IEEE, 2018, pp. 5129–5136.
[327] F. Stulp, E. Theodorou, J. Buchli, and S. Schaal, “Learning to grasp
under uncertainty,” in 2011 IEEE International Conference on Robotics
and Automation.
IEEE, 2011, pp. 5703–5708.
[328] V. Tchuiev and V. Indelman, “Inference over distribution of posterior
class probabilities for reliable bayesian classiﬁcation and object-level
perception,” IEEE Robotics and Automation Letters, vol. 3, no. 4, pp.
4329–4336, 2018.
[329] Y. Feldman and V. Indelman, “Bayesian viewpoint-dependent robust
classiﬁcation under model and localization uncertainty,” in 2018 IEEE
International Conference on Robotics and Automation.
IEEE, 2018,
pp. 3221–3228.
[330] N. Yang, L. von Stumberg, R. Wang, and D. Cremers, “D3vo: Deep
depth, deep pose and deep uncertainty for monocular visual odometry,”
in Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and
Pattern Recognition, 2020, pp. 1281–1292.
[331] S. Wang, R. Clark, H. Wen, and N. Trigoni, “Deepvo: Towards
end-to-end visual odometry with deep recurrent convolutional neural
networks,” in 2017 IEEE International Conference on Robotics and
Automation (ICRA).
IEEE, 2017, pp. 2043–2050.
[332] C. Gur˘au, C. H. Tong, and I. Posner, “Fit for purpose? predicting
perception performance based on past experience,” in International
Symposium on Experimental Robotics.
Springer, 2016, pp. 454–464.
[333] S. Daftry, S. Zeng, J. A. Bagnell, and M. Hebert, “Introspective
perception: Learning to predict failures in vision systems,” in 2016
IEEE/RSJ International Conference on Intelligent Robots and Systems
(IROS).
IEEE, 2016, pp. 1743–1750.
[334] M. Netzband, W. L. Stefanov, and C. Redman, Applied remote sensing
for urban planning, governance and sustainability.
Springer Science
& Business Media, 2007.
[335] C. Giardino, M. Bresciani, P. Villa, and A. Martinelli, “Application of
remote sensing in water resource management: the case study of lake
trasimeno, italy,” Water resources management, vol. 24, no. 14, pp.
3885–3899, 2010.
[336] C. J. Van Westen, “Remote sensing for natural disaster management,”
International archives of photogrammetry and remote sensing, vol. 33,
no. B7/4; PART 7, pp. 1609–1617, 2000.
[337] X. X. Zhu, D. Tuia, L. Mou, G.-S. Xia, L. Zhang, F. Xu, and
F. Fraundorfer, “Deep learning in remote sensing: A comprehensive
review and list of resources,” IEEE Geoscience and Remote Sensing
Magazine, vol. 5, no. 4, pp. 8–36, 2017.
[338] J. Gawlikowski, M. Schmitt, A. Kruspe, and X. X. Zhu, “On the
fusion strategies of sentinel-1 and sentinel-2 data for local climate zone
classiﬁcation,” in IEEE International Geoscience and Remote Sensing
Symposium, 2020, pp. 2081–2084.
[339] ESA,
“European
space
agency
(esa)
devel-
oped
earth
observation
satellites,”
2019.
[Online].
Available: http://www.esa.int:8080/ESA Multimedia/Images/2019/05/
ESA-developed Earth observation missions
[340] Z. Nado, N. Band, M. Collier, J. Djolonga, M. W. Dusenberry, S. Far-
quhar, A. Filos, M. Havasi, R. Jenatton, G. Jerfel et al., “Uncertainty
baselines: Benchmarks for uncertainty & robustness in deep learning,”
arXiv preprint arXiv:2106.04015, 2021.
[341] M. Kull and P. A. Flach, “Reliability maps: a tool to enhance
probability estimates and improve classiﬁcation accuracy,” in Joint
European Conference on Machine Learning and Knowledge Discovery
in Databases.
Springer, 2014, pp. 18–33.
[342] J. Antor´an, U. Bhatt, T. Adel, A. Weller, and J. M. Hern´andez-Lobato,
“Getting a clue: A method for explaining uncertainty estimates,” in
International Conference on Learning Representations, 2021.
[343] M. Reichstein, G. Camps-Valls, B. Stevens, M. Jung, J. Denzler, and
N. Carvalhais, “Deep learning and process understanding for data-
driven earth system science,” Nature, vol. 566, no. 7743, pp. 195–204,
2019.
[344] J. Willard, X. Jia, S. Xu, M. Steinbach, and V. Kumar, “Integrating
physics-based modeling with machine learning: A survey,” arXiv
preprint arXiv:2003.04919, 2020.
[345] E. De B´ezenac, A. Pajot, and P. Gallinari, “Deep learning for physical
processes: Incorporating prior scientiﬁc knowledge,” Journal of Statis-
tical Mechanics: Theory and Experiment, vol. 2019, no. 12, p. 124009,
2019.
