 
1 
 
 

 
2 
 

 
3 
 
Figure 1. Schematic diagram of newer catalytic technologies for plastic upcycling. 
Table 1. Strategies for plastic waste treatment. 
Categories 
Techniques 
Advantages 
Disadvantages 
Upcycling 
Photocatalysis 
Produce high-value products 
Mild reaction conditions 
High product selectivity 
Use solar energy 
Low reaction efficiency 
Low reaction stability 
Thermocatalysis 
Produce high-value products 
High reaction efficiency 
High reaction stability 
Strict reaction conditions 
High energy consumption 
Electrocatalysis 
Produce high-value products 
Mild reaction conditions 
High reaction efficiency 
Limited application scope 
High energy consumption 
Downcycling 
Mechanical recycling 
Produce regenerative plastics 
Strict pretreatment 
Raw materials limitations 
No recycling 
Incineration 
Feedstock versatility 
Electricity production 
Release toxic compounds 
Massive CO2 emissions 
Landfill 
Simple and low cost 
Unsustainability 
Soil and groundwater pollution 
 

 
4 
 
In contrast to traditional plastic recycling strategies, the upcycling of plastics into high-value 
chemicals and green fuels using catalytic technologies is attracting increasing research attention 
(Figure 2).[16-18] Although thermocatalytic conversion requires higher temperatures, it ensures 
high reaction efficiencies and can significantly suppress side reactions.[19] Similarly, 
electrocatalytic conversion for plastic reforming requires additional electrical energy input. 
However, this technique ensures good selectivity, an impressive reaction rate, and more 
efficient use of electrical energy to achieve precise conversion of C-C bonds, accompanied by 
the production of green fuels such as H2 and CH4.[20] Photocatalytic plastic upcycling relies 
only on solar energy, and the reaction conditions are milder. Although it can achieve precise 
activation of specific chemical bonds and the conversion of waste plastics into high-value 
chemicals, its reaction efficiency needs to be improved.[21] 
 
Figure 2. (a) Keyword clouds were generated to provide a correlation between most researched 
processes and hotspots along with time. It was created by text-mining published plastic 
recycling articles from 2016 to the present. (b) Corresponding keyword thermodynamic 
diagram. Red circles show the keywords related to upcycling. 
Catalytic conversion of plastics can be categorized into two types: indirect and direct 
upcycling. In indirect upcycling routes, plastics are initially depolymerized into monomers, 
oligomers, or derivatives, which are subsequently converted into high-value chemicals 
containing specific functional groups. The microstructure of the polymers plays a critical role 
in selective depolymerization, which involves pathways mediated by monomers, oligomers, or 

 
5 
 
derivatives.[17] As shown in Figure 3a, the process involves polymers that contain ester or 
amide linkages in their main chains. Treatment with alcohols, ammonia (amines), bases, and 
other reagents (represented by Y-H) facilitates the decomposition of plastics into monomers or 
derivatives, which are further subjected to catalytic conversion into high-value products. For 
plastic polymers with C-C bonds, the depolymerized monomers can introduce specific chemical 
functional groups to replace the hydrogen atoms in monomers and oligomers, enabling their 
selective transformation into heteroatom-containing chemicals (Figure 3b). Additionally, 
plastics can be directly degraded into C1 module molecules (platform molecules) such as CO2 
and CH4 using catalysts.[22] The conversion of these platform molecules into high-value carbon 
(C2+) fuels or other value-added chemicals has attracted considerable attention (Figure 3c). 
In addition to indirect conversion, the direct conversion of plastics is a strategy with great 
potential.[23] As a macromolecular structure, plastic comprises a large number of repeating 
monomer units connected by specific types of chemical bonds.[24] The precise activation of 
these chemical bonds forms the basis for the design of catalytic systems. As illustrated in Figure 
3d, direct hydrogenolysis of plastics is a powerful approach for polymer conversion because 
the monomer units in polymers are readily reduced and cleaved by hydrogen,[25] thereby 
enabling the conversion of plastic wastes into high-value chemicals. Direct conversion can also 
be achieved through coupled exothermic hydrogenation and endothermic aromatization 
reactions, suggesting the feasibility of in situ hydrogen species generation (e.g., self-sustaining 
hydrogenolysis of polymers or the decomposition of another hydrogen donor) to drive the 
process selectively (Figure 3e).[26] Moreover, during the depolymerization of plastics, 
heteroatoms such as O, N, and S are directly introduced to attack the C-C/C-H bonds, 
facilitating the incorporation of high-value functional groups (Figure 3f).[27] Subsequently, 
catalysts have been utilized to accomplish the depolymerization and functionalization of 
plastics, representing an ideal pathway for the selective catalytic conversion of plastics. 

 
6 
 
 
Figure 3. Schematic illustration of indirect and direct plastic upcycling routes. (a, b) The sub-
type of monomer-, oligomer-, or derivate-mediated routes. (c) The route mediated by small 
platform molecules. (d) The directly disassembled routes via the activation and cleavage of 
specific chemical bonds without successive transformations. (e) The direct deconstruction 
routes undergo further transformation to chemicals with higher value. (f) The functionalized 
routes by inserting chemical functional groups. 
In recent years, numerous reviews have focused on the degradation or recycling of plastic 
wastes, primarily outlining the strategies for converting plastic wastes into chemicals.[28-29] 
However, attention has been rarely paid to the internal conversion mechanism and selective 
conversion process of plastic reforming. Researchers have primarily focused on individual 
catalytic technologies, neglecting a comprehensive study of the novel catalytic technologies 
like thermocatalysis, electrocatalysis, and photocatalysis. In this regard, a comprehensive 
overview of the existing catalytic plastic upcycling technologies can provide readers with an 
in-depth understanding of the advancements in plastic reforming technologies. 
Thermocatalytic conversion of plastics occurs at a certain temperature and pressure. Methods 
that have been explored in this regard include pyrolytic conversion,[30] catalytic 

 
7 
 
hydrogenation,[31] and field-assisted thermal conversion.[32] In the context of thermocatalytic 
plastic conversion, we put particular emphasis on the selective upcycling of waste plastics into 
high-value products such as liquid fuels and hydrocarbons, highlighting the recent 
advancements in the field and assessing their potential to create a circular economy for plastics. 
2.1. Thermocatalytic conversion process and mechanism 
Thermocatalytic conversion primarily involves overcoming the thermodynamic energy 
barrier in a catalytic reaction system via heating, thereby promoting the conversion of reactants 
to products.[33] Therefore, it is essential to consider the deconstruction and upcycling of plastics 
from thermodynamic and kinetic perspectives. As depicted in Figure 4, the selective conversion 
of polymers to the desired products involves a certain reaction barrier (Ea) and an enthalpy 
difference (ΔHrxn) between the reactants and products.[17] These factors determine the 
favorability of the free energy of the reaction. Because the entropy change (ΔSrxn) during the 
depolymerization of plastics is positive and ΔHrxn varies significantly depending on the target 
product, catalysts can effectively reduce Ea during thermocatalytic reactions while leaving 
ΔHrxn unchanged.[34] This indicates that catalysts do not alter the thermodynamics of the 
reaction but can modify the reaction rates through product substitution mechanisms. The 
reaction temperature required for plastic depolymerization plays a crucial role and is primarily 
influenced by the upper temperature limit (Tc) of the polymer.[35] Therefore, optimization of the 
catalysts and reaction conditions is a primary focus in thermocatalytic conversions. 

 
8 
 
 
Figure 4. Schematic illustration of thermodynamic and kinetic control in plastic upcycling. It 
is classified as ΔHrxn>0, ΔHrxn≈0, ΔHrxn<0 from the thermodynamic limitation, corresponding 
to the kinetic limitation Ea=Small or Ea=Large. 
2.2. Overview of Recent Advances and Studies 
2.2.1. Thermocatalytic conversion under extreme conditions 
Pyrolysis can convert plastic polymers into high-value chemicals such as fuel oils under 
extreme conditions of high temperature and pressure, achieving a high recovery rate and 
allowing for the rapid cleavage of plastic chains to produce valuable chemicals.[36] However, 
the complexity of the pyrolysis process, which includes terminal chain depolymerization, 
random chain depolymerization, side chain elimination, and monomer formation, renders it 
challenging to fully comprehend and summarize the reaction mechanisms.[37] The lack of 
selectivity in high-temperature pyrolysis processes also leads to highly complex product 
compositions, limiting the secondary utilization of plastic conversion products (Table 2). 
Therefore, efficient and selective pyrolysis of plastics are critical for future advancements in 
this field. 

 
9 
 
Table 2. Different pyrolysis technologies and corresponding products. 
Technologies 
Plastics 
Conditions 
Products 
Refs. 
Thermal pyrolysis 
LDPE 
793 K 
C5–C15 hydrocarbons and C12–C28 light oil 
[38] 
HDPE 
723 K and 773 K 
Paraffin, olefin, naphthene and aromatic 
[39] 
PP 
793 K 
C5–C15 hydrocarbons and C12–C28 light oil 
[38] 
Catalytic pyrolysis 
LDPE 
825 K 
Monoaromatics and C5–C12 alkanes/olefins 
[40] 
HDPE 
723–743 K 
C13–C23+ paraffin 
[41] 
PS 
673 K 
C9–C12 alkylaromatic, methylstyrene and 
isopropylbenzene  
[42] 
Hydropyrolysis 
PP 
523 K 
Gasoline (C1–C12) and diesel (C9–C22) 
[43] 
PET 
923 K 
Paraffins, olefins and aromatics 
[44] 
 
Considering the above, Scott et al.[45] conducted a tandem catalytic reaction using Pt/γ-Al2O3 
(Figure 5a), achieving high yields (up to 80 wt%) in the conversion of various polyethylene 
grades. Despite a high reaction temperature of 280 °C, this method demonstrated excellent 
selectivity, producing high-value long-chain alkylaromatics and alkylnaphthalenes as the main 
reaction products. Gel permeation chromatography with refractive index detection (GPC-RI) 
(Figure 5b) revealed a tenfold reduction in the molecular weight (Mw) of polyethylene. The 
temporal evolution of the reaction products (Figure 5c) revealed a significant increase in the 
fraction of liquid hydrocarbons during a short induction period. To investigate the 
thermocatalytic reforming mechanism of PE (Figure 5d-f), the reaction products were 
examined by NMR spectroscopy, which revealed that most of the aromatic protons were bound 
to the benzene ring; no alkene or diene was detected during the reaction. This implies that the 
polyethylene chain can absorb the hydrogen produced during aromatization, thereby promoting 
the aromatization reaction. The Pt/γ-Al2O3-catalyzed tandem hydrogenolysis/aromatization 

 
10 
 
reaction of polyethylene enables the direct conversion of waste polyethylene plastics into high-
value alkylaromatics and alkylcycloalkanes. This process effectively converted polyethylene 
into low-molecular-weight liquid/wax products, eliminating the need for additional solvents 
and hydrogen. Notably, a relatively high reaction temperature, reaching 280 °C, is required in 
this method. Consequently, the current application cost of this approach remains high, limiting 
its practical implementation. 
 
Figure 5. (a) Schematic of reactor with photographs of the powdered polymer and a 
transmission electron micrograph of the catalyst. (b) Hydrocarbon distributions after 24 hours 
at 280°C. (c) Evolution of major product fractions catalyzed by Pt/γ-Al2O3 in an unstirred mini-
autoclave reactor at 280°C. (d) 1H and 13C NMR spectra, recorded in deuterated TCE. (e) FD-
MS analysis in the solvent-free catalytic conversion of polyethylene. (f) Overall PE conversion 
to alkylaromatics and alkylnaphthenes, and proposed mechanism of tandem polyethylene 
hydrogenolysis/aromatization via dehydrocyclization. Reproduced with permission.[45] 
Copyright 2020, AAAS. 
The highly selective upcycling of waste plastics into high-value chemicals is a critical step 
toward achieving a global circular economy. Ma et al.[46] introduced a novel two-step 
heterogeneous catalytic system (Figure 6a) to convert PLA plastics into methyl methacrylate. 
Using an α-MoC catalyst, methyl propionate could be efficiently produced from PLA waste 
plastics through alcoholysis and hydrodeoxygenation (Figure 6b). The conversion of actual 

 
11 
 
plastic materials, such as straws, cups, and tableware, to methyl propionate was also attempted, 
achieving the complete conversion of polylactic acid and a methyl propionate (MP) yield of 98% 
(Figure 6c). Analysis of the reaction process indicated that polylactic acid underwent 
alcoholysis to generate methyl lactate, which was subsequently converted to MP via catalytic 
hydrodeoxygenation (Figure 6d,e). Furthermore, Cs-La/SiO2 was used as a catalyst for the 
conversion of PLA to produce both methyl methacrylate and MP (Figure 6f). Thus, gram-level 
polylactic acid plastics could be successfully converted to methyl methacrylate through a two-
step catalytic process, as summarized in Figure 6g-i. This innovative method for the highly 
selective conversion of PLA into high-value chemicals is advantageous over natural 
degradation pathways. Compared to the traditional monomer recovery process, this route offers 
a novel recycling strategy for the production of high-value chemicals with high conversion and 
selectivity. However, an elevated reaction temperature necessitates relatively high processing 
costs, hampering its widespread practical application. Additionally, the two-step reaction 
process renders the reaction rate more dependent on various conditions. 
 
Figure 6. (a) Schematic reaction pathways for selective HDO of PLA on catalyst. (b) The 
product distribution from HDO of PLA with different molar ratios of MeOH/LA monomer. 
Schematic process (c) and time-dependent conversion (d) of commercial PLA products towards 
MP. (e) Repeated catalytic cycles of PLA degradation. (f) Schematic pathway of MMA 
production from waste PLA plastics through two-step catalytic process.(g) Upcycling route 

 
12 
 
from PLA to MMA. Chemical structures (h) and product yields (i) of different polyesters 
converted to alkyl esters through HDO. Reproduced with permission.[46] Copyright 2023, 
Springer Nature. 
2.2.2. Thermocatalytic conversion under mild conditions 
The pursuit of mild reaction conditions in pyrolytic conversion is essential for realizing low-
cost plastic conversion. High reaction temperatures are often required for a series of catalytic 
reactions, limiting their practical industrial applications.[47] Lercher et al.[48] proposed the 
utilization of highly ionic reactions to catalyze plastic polymers and reduce the energy of the 
ionic transition states, enabling the complete conversion of polyethylene and polypropylene 
into liquid isoalkanes at temperatures below 100 °C. The experiments were conducted using 
commercial low-density polyethylene (LDPE) and iC5 as substrates in a glass-tube reactor, as 
depicted in Figure 7a. The presence of Lewis acidic chloroaluminate ions, along with iC5, 
facilitated the complete conversion of LDPE after 3 h at 70 °C (Figure 7b). This strategy 
enables the near-quantitative and selective conversion of a wide range of polymeric consumer 
products to a total of more than 70 wt% C6–C12 products (Figure 7c). To account for the tandem 
reactions proceeding at a constant rate, this study assumed two carbocation-based ligated 
catalytic cycles with olefins derived via cracking as the ligated intermediates (Figure 7d). 
Carbocations formed in the polymer chains tend to undergo skeletal isomerization and cracking 
through beta-scission. The study introduced a transformative and scalable approach for the 
conversion of polyolefins. The mild reaction temperature employed in the process significantly 
reduces the cost of catalytic plastic conversion. However, contrary to the principles of 
environmental protection, the use of additional chemicals currently restricts their application 
prospects. 

 
13 
 
 
Figure 7. (a) One-pot catalytic LDPE and iC5 upcycling into liquid alkanes over Lewis acidic 
chloroaluminate ionic liquid at 70°C. (b) Time-resolved conversion profile of LDPE in the 
presence of TBC at different temperatures. (c) Selective deconstruction of postconsumer 
polyolefin waste into liquid alkanes. (d) Proposed reaction mechanism for the tandem cracking-
alkylation process of a polyolefin with iC5. Reproduced with permission.[48] Copyright 2023, 
AAAS. 
Currently, researchers are focusing on the use of catalysts to develop more efficient and 
environmentally friendly plastic recycling routes with milder reaction conditions.[49] Niu et 
al.[50] demonstrated the efficacy of a dinuclear composite catalyst for the degradation of 
polyethylene terephthalate (PET) and other widely used plastics in daily life. The binuclear zinc 
metal catalyst Zn2L(NO3)2 was synthesized based on the concept of binuclear 
metallohydrolases (Figure 8a). The depolymerization kinetics of PET were evaluated under 
mild environmental conditions, and complete depolymerization into monomers was observed 
within 10 weeks (Figure 8b). The hydrolysis kinetics of Zn2L(NO3)2 were comparable for 

 
14 
 
crystalline PET particles (38%) and amorphous PET at pH 8 and 60 °C, indicating the unique 
capability of Zn2L(NO3)2 to chemically decompose inert PET under mild conditions (Figure 
8c). Furthermore, this study demonstrated the catalytic potential and cycle stability of 
Zn2L(NO3)2 in the depolymerization of 13 different polyesters and nylons, highlighting its 
broad applicability (Figure 8d). DFT calculations revealed that the binuclear catalyst formed 
stable interactions with the EGD compound through two adjacent zinc sites (Figure 8e). This 
biomimetic binuclear Zn-site catalyst possesses intramolecular properties that enable the rapid 
hydrolysis of plastic polymers under mild conditions. However, the reaction products are 
relatively complex. To further advance plastic recycling, higher-value high-carbon products 
should be emphasized, as it aligns better with the establishment of a circular carbon economy. 
 
Fig. 8 (a) Binuclear catalyst design. (b) The hydrolysis kinetics of am-PET over Zn2/C, zinc 
acetate and zinc oxide at pH 8 and 40 °C. (c) The hydrolysis kinetics of am-PET and crystalline 

 
15 
 
PET granule (38%) over Zn2/C and commercial HiC at pH 8 and 60 °C, an optimal condition 
for the commercial HiC. (d) The specific activities of Zn2/C toward different PET sources, PET 
mixtures, and various polyesters and polyamide at pH 13 and 60 °C. Insets show the images of 
PET crystalline granules, amorphous flakes, clear and dyed bottle flakes, and cloth fibres. (e) 
Potential energy profile of EGD decomposition on Zn2L(OH)2 compound. The inset shows the 
DFT-optimized geometries for reactants and intermediates. Reproduced with permission.[50] 
Copyright 2023, Springer Nature. 
2.2.3. Novel field-assisted thermocatalytic conversion under mild conditions 
As the name implies, field assistance involves the utilization of external fields, such as 
microwaves and piezoelectricity, to aid pyrolytic and catalytic processes, thereby facilitating 
the rapid conversion of plastics.[51,52] In microwave-assisted catalysis, the electromagnetic 
spectra encompass microwave frequencies ranging from 0.3 to 300 GHz.[53] Compared to 
conventional thermal catalysis, microwave-assisted catalysis ensures the uniform heating of 
plastics, resulting in high reaction rates and reduced energy consumption.[54] 
Edwards et al.[32] introduced an innovative one-step microwave-assisted catalytic method for 
the rapid conversion of plastics. The method relied primarily on microwave-induced solid-solid 
catalytic reactions (Figure 9a). Under the influence of microwaves, the mechanical mixture of 
plastic and catalyst (FeAlOx) underwent dissociation, resulting in the rapid release of a 
substantial amount of hydrogen gas, reaching a hydrogen yield of 55.6 mmol·g-1. The remaining 
carbon residues predominantly existed in the form of carbon nanotubes (Figure 9b,c). This 
approach demonstrated a wide applicability to various plastics, including PP and PS (Figure 
9d). Although microwave field-assisted catalysis has extensive applications, the mechanism 
governing microwave–compound interactions remains unclear.[55] The FeAlOx catalyst 
generated significant heat during microwave exposure, allowing to reach the required 
temperature difference for C-H bond cracking upon contact with the plastic substrate (Figure 
9e). Consequently, intermediates, small olefins, and H2 were formed, while carbon species 
infiltrated the iron catalyst lattice, leading to the formation of multi-walled carbon nanotubes 

 
16 
 
(Figure 9f). The one-step microwave-induced catalytic bond cleavage of plastics demonstrated 
in this study offers an efficient and selective approach for transforming plastics, demonstrating 
its potential as a novel technique for practical engineering applications. However, carbon 
nanotubes obtained by microwave-assisted pyrolysis are still less attractive than high-value 
chemicals, and the microwave field input requires high power consumption, leading to high 
processing costs. 
 
Figure 9. (a) The two-step pyrolysis and gasification process and the present one-step 
microwave-initiated catalytic process, and the corresponding experimental set-up and reaction 
system configuration. (b) A comparison of microwave and conventional thermal processes. (c) 
Successive cycles of the deconstruction of HDPE, polypropylene and polystyrene on FeAlOx. 
(d) Hydrogen efficiency and evolved gas composition (vol%). (e) An illustration on microwave-
initiated decomposition of plastic over a FeAlOx catalyst. (f) Modelling of the electric field 
strength and the heating rate at the interface. Reproduced with permission.[32] Copyright 2020, 
Springer Nature. 
 

 
17 
 
2.2.4 Other notable catalytic plastic pyrolysis technologies 
In addition to the aforementioned plastic conversion technologies, the emerging catalytic 
pyrolysis technologies for plastic conversion are gaining attention because of the high 
selectivity and yield of high-value chemicals.[56] These technologies are at the forefront of 
research and development and are expected to drive future advancements in this field. For 
example, Hu et al.[57] proposed an innovative plastic reforming strategy based on electro-joule 
heating. This approach overcomes the challenges of poor selectivity and low yield of 
conventional plastic pyrolysis reactions. By utilizing electro-joule pulse heating technology, 
precise control of the reaction temperature in time and space can be achieved, leading to 
improved product selectivity and efficient conversion of plastics into monomers. This 
breakthrough opens up new possibilities for plastic recycling. Table 3 summarizes the existing 
technologies to provide an overview of the current research advancements in the pyrolytic 
catalytic conversion of plastics. These approaches utilize high-energy-induced bond 
decomposition and high-temperature catalytic conversion to enhance the conversion efficiency. 
The primary focus is to achieve high selectivity for high-value chemicals and sustainable energy 
production. Consequently, the thermal catalytic conversion technology is advancing toward 
practical applications. However, maintaining a high and stable reaction temperature requires 
significant energy consumption, resulting in higher costs associated with this technology. 
 
 

 
18 
 
Table 3. Thermocatalytic conversion of plastics over different catalysts. 
Catalysts 
Plastics 
Conditions 
Products 
Selectivity 
Refs. 
L-ZrO2@mSiO2 
LDPE 
573 K, 1MPa 
C18-centred distribution 
39–54% 
[58] 
PDA-CNTs 
PET 
423K 
BHET 
50+% 
[19] 
ZnO zeolite 
PET 
723 K 
aromatic hydrocarbon 
83.9 % 
[59] 
Pt/WO3/ZrO2 mix HY zeolite 
LDPE and PP 
523 K, 
1.5 MPa 
liquid fuels 
85% 
[46] 
sea shell-derived catalyst 
PLA 
773 K 
lactic acid 
12% 
[60] 
SO42−–ZrO2 
HDPE 
773-973 K 
ethylene 
25% 
[61] 
Ru/C 
PE 
473 K, 
2 MP 
liquid n-alkanes 
45% 
[62] 
Ru/TiO2 
i-PP 
523 K, 3MPa 
valuable lubricant-range 
hydrocarbons 
80+% 
[63] 
Ir 
HDPE 
423 K 
linear alkane 
56% 
[64] 
β-zeolite/Pt@silicalite 
LDPE 
523 K 
naphtha 
89.5% 
[65] 
Electrocatalytic technologies enable the conversion of plastics under ambient conditions via 
depolymerization induced by an externally applied potential and include oxidation and 
reduction reactions.[66] Primary cleavage of the C-C bonds of waste plastics occurs at the anode, 
and the process requires a higher anode potential.[67] However, a higher anode potential 
enhances the depolymerization efficiency at the expense of increased energy consumption. 
Moreover, a higher current density leads to reduced selectivity and Faraday efficiency. 
Electrocatalytic reforming of plastics commonly involves alkaline or acidic pretreatment to 
enhance the solubilization of plastics and facilitate the interaction between catalysts and plastic 
substrates.[68] However, this pretreatment method has adverse environmental impacts and 

 
19 
 
significantly increases the cost of the reforming process, thereby limiting its large-scale 
practical application. 
3.1. Electrocatalytic conversion process and mechanism 
Electrocatalytic reactions involve the breaking and formation of chemical bonds and include 
continuous multistep electron transfer processes.[69] During these reactions, a series of 
intermediates acquire electrons from the catalyst surface to participate in the reaction (Figure 
10a). The strength of the interaction between the intermediate and electrocatalyst is 
characterized by the free energy of adsorption (ΔGintermediate), which is primarily determined by 
the electronic structure of the electrocatalyst.[70] The adsorption is highly sensitive to the surface 
properties and the nature of the catalyst–electrolyte interface. Moreover, investigating the 
relationship between the catalytic activity and the adsorption process of the intermediates 
provides valuable insights into the design of electrocatalysts (Figure 10b). The intermediates 
are intricately bound, and decoupling the binding among the intermediates is challenging. 
Notably, the adsorption energy of the hydrogen-containing intermediates exhibited a linear 
relationship with the adsorption energy of the central atom A (ΔGA) owing to the similar nature 
of chemical bonding (Figure 10c).[71] This finding has significant implications for the design 
of catalytic materials. Furthermore, the thermodynamics and kinetics of the adsorption and 
desorption of key intermediates play a crucial role in achieving highly selective plastic 
reforming processes. 
 
Figure 10. Mechanism of plastics electrocatalytic conversion. (a) Free energy diagram 
showcasing the reaction intermediates and reaction pathways. (b) Volcano-type diagram that 

 
20 
 
establishes a correlation between the adsorption energy of key intermediates and the catalytic 
activity. (c) Scaling relationship between the adsorption energies of intermediates. 
Currently, the electrocatalytic conversion processes for plastic depolymerization 
predominantly involve heterogeneous reactions. These reactions primarily involve direct 
integrated reactions, leading to the generation of intermediates or products, as well as local self-
feeding tandem reactions involving subsequent reactions with the adsorbed products.[72] The 
electrocatalytic conversion reaction for plastic depolymerization is a relatively complex process 
involving the simultaneous activation of multiple molecules.[73] It is imperative for catalysts to 
be able to independently regulate the adsorption of different intermediates in each component 
reaction and facilitate their interactions to efficiently form new bonds. To achieve efficient and 
selective electrocatalytic processes, researchers have developed various strategies that 
primarily involve the construction of multiple functional sites and the introduction of new 
degrees of freedom to manipulate intermediate adsorption (Figure 11).[74] Such advancements 
are important for guiding the design of electrocatalytic systems for plastic reforming. 
 
Figure 11. Reaction types and catalyst design strategies for electrocatalytic conversion of 
plastics.  

 
21 
 
3.2. Overview of Recent Advances 
3.2.1. Electrocatalytic conversion into C1 products 
The utilization of higher oxidation potentials allows the rapid depolymerization of plastic 
polymers, enabling the conversion of plastics into valuable chemicals. However, this approach 
often leads to lower product selectivity and the formation of numerous by-products, which 
hinder the efficient separation and utilization of the desired chemicals.[75] To address this 
challenge, Duan et al.[76] employed a non-noble metal-based cobalt-nickel phosphide 
electrocatalyst for upcycling waste PET plastics. Technoeconomic feasibility analysis (TEA) 
was conducted to assess the economic viability of the electrocatalytic PET upcycling strategy. 
As illustrated in Figure 12a, the CoNi0.25P catalyst exhibited partial surface oxidation and the 
formation of a core-shell structure during the hydrogen evolution reaction. An anion-exchange 
membrane was used to assemble the membrane electrodes (Figure 12b). The introduction of 
ethylene glycol into the electrolyte revealed that the CoNi0.25P/NF catalyst outperformed the 
other catalysts, exhibiting a lower onset potential and higher current density (Figure 12c). At a 
lower oxidation potential, EG was efficiently oxidized to formate with a Faradaic efficiency of 
90% and a formic acid yield of up to 4.1 mmol·cm-2·h-1 (Figure 12d,e). The Sankey diagram 
in Figure 12f shows that 1 kg of PET plastic produces 389.2 g of formic acid and 818.5 g of 
PTA. In summary, the electrocatalytic PET reforming strategy involves a multistep process for 
obtaining KDF (Figure 12g). Device-based plastic electrocatalysis enables higher current 
densities and Faradaic efficiencies at lower oxidation potentials. However, it is important to 
note that the use of electrocatalysis to convert high-value high-carbon fuels into low-value C1 
products may result in the waste of energy. 

 
22 
 
 
Figure 12. (a) TEM images and corresponding SAED patterns of CoNi0.25P, and schematic 
illustration of the structural evolution of CoNi0.25P catalyst under reaction conditions. (b) The 
MEA setup for paired HER(−)//EG oxidation(+). (c) LSV curves (85% iR corrected) for EG 
oxidation. (d) FE and productivity of formate on CoNi0.25P/NF at different potentials. (e) 
Faradaic efficiency and productivity as function of current density for EG oxidation. (f) Sankey 
diagram for the mass flow of PET upcycling. Photograph of separated high-purity PTA is shown 
(inset). (g) Scheme for electrocatalytic PET conversion into TPA and KDF via the three-step 
pathway. Reproduced with permission.[76] Copyright 2021, Springer Nature. 
3.2.2. Electrocatalytic conversion into C2+ products 
Electrochemical oxidation is a sustainable and promising approach for the direct conversion 
of waste plastics into valuable fine chemicals.[77] However, the current products obtained are 
predominantly low-value C1 chemicals, which is not in line with the principles of a circular 
economy.[78] To achieve the highly selective production of higher-value C2+ products, Duan et 
al.[79] developed an Au/Ni(OH)2 synergistic catalyst with dual active sites for enhanced 
adsorption and catalysis. Their strategy facilitated the mass transfer, adsorption, and catalytic 
processes of the reactants on the catalyst surface, enabling the selective conversion of biomass 
resources (glycerol) and waste plastics (PET) into high-value lactic acid and glycolic acid at 
an industrial-scale high current density (>300 mA·cm−2) with a designed diaphragm-free stack 

 
23 
 
(Figure 13a-d). Notably, at high conversion rates, the lactic acid and glycolic acid yields were 
75% and 91%, respectively, in the presence of Au/Ni(OH)2 (Figure 13e). In situ infrared 
spectroscopy was conducted to elucidate the reaction pathway for glycerol oxidation (Figure 
13f). Glycerol was oxidized to GLD/DHA, leading to spontaneous lactic acid formation, while 
ethylene glycol was converted to glycolic acid via oxidation. (Figure 13g). This study offers 
a novel approach for the valorization of carbon resources such as plastics and biomass into 
high-value C2+ products. However, high oxidation potentials also lead to higher energy 
consumption. Thus, achieving fast and precise cleavage of C-C bonds at a low current remains 
significantly challenging. 
 
Figure 13. (a) Electrocatalytic upcycling of biomass and plastic wastes to monomers of 
biodegradable polymers and H2. (b) Photograph and schematic illustration of the stacked 
membrane-free flow electrolyzer with three units. (c) LSV curves of GLY (left) and EG (right) 

 
24 
 
electrooxidations at a scan rate of 10 mV/s in 3 M KOH with 0.3 M substrates over different 
catalysts. (d) Conversion rate of GLY (top) and EG (down), and the corresponding selectivity 
of LA (top) and GA (down) over different catalysts. (e) Kinetic curves for GLY (top) and EG 
(down) electrooxidations over Au/Ni(OH)2. (f) Infrared spectra recorded during glycerol 
oxidation on Au/Ni(OH)2. (g) Proposed reaction mechanisms for electrooxidation of GLY-to-
LA (top) and EG-to-GA (down). Reproduced with permission.[79] Copyright 2023, American 
Chemical Society. 
The electrocatalytic conversion of ethylene glycol, which is derived from PET, into high-
value C2+ chemicals and hydrogen offers a promising solution to the pressing issue of plastic 
pollution. Chen et al.[80] studied the electrooxidation of EG to glycolic acid using a Pd-Ni(OH)2 
catalyst (Figure 14a), demonstrating exceptional performance even at industrial-grade current 
densities (600 mA·cm-2, 1.15 V vs. RHE) with a custom-made two-electrode membrane 
electrode assembly flow electrolyzer (Figure 14b). The catalyst exhibited high Faradaic 
efficiency and selectivity (>85%), and the electrolysis was stable for over 200 h. Pd-Ni(OH)2 
exhibited a significantly lower oxidation potential and enhanced current density for ethylene 
glycol oxidation compared to the oxygen evolution reaction (OER) in alkaline electrolytes 
(Figure 14c). The addition of ethylene glycol substantially decreased the required reaction 
potential, indicating a more favorable kinetic profile than that of the OER (Figure 14d). Pd-
Ni(OH)2 showed excellent electrocatalytic performance with a high Faradaic efficiency of 90% 
and ethylene glycol conversion of 93.2%, with 91.6% selectivity toward glycolic acid (Figure 
14e-g). The generation of *OH active species was the rate-determining step in this process, 
with Pd-Ni(OH)2 facilitating the conversion of the intermediates into glycolic acid at a lower 
potential (Figure 14h). This study achieved the highly selective conversion of the PET plastic 
derivative, ethylene glycol, to glycolic acid at a lower potential, implying a lower application 
cost. The production of higher amounts of C2+ products will be of great significance for the 
carbon cycle. However, the current electrocatalytic conversion technology is limited to the 
conversion of monomers or derivatives of plastic products, rendering it difficult to achieve the 

 
25 
 
direct reforming of plastic wastes. Therefore, it is worth considering whether combining 
electrocatalytic processes with other catalytic reactions can expand the application range of 
plastic reforming reactions. 
 
Figure 14. (a) Schematic illustration of the synthesis of Pd−Ni(OH)2 on NF, and corresponding 
SEM images and TEM images. (b) Schematic illustration and photograph of a two-electrode 
MEA flow electrolyzer for PET electro-reforming. (c) LSV curves and (d) comparisons of the 
potentials needed to achieve designated current densities for Pd−Ni(OH)2/NF in 1.0 M KOH 
with and without EG. (e) FE of Pd−Ni(OH)2/NF for GA production at designated voltages. (f) 
The concentration of EG, FA, and GA during electrolysis. (g) CP curves of Pd−Ni(OH)2/NF(+) 
and Ni2P/NF(−) for PET electro-reforming, and schematic illustration of the process of PET 
electro-reforming and product separation. Reproduced with permission.[80] Copyright 2023, 
John Wiley and Sons. 
3.2.3 Electrocatalytically coupled multiple reactions for conversion to C1 products 
Coupling waste polymer plastics with other electrocatalytic processes for high-value 
chemical production is a more efficient approach for plastic upcycling and significantly 

 
26 
 
enhances the production efficiency of valuable chemicals. Ma et al.[81] employed cost-effective 
and readily available nickel-cobalt-based and tin-based oxide materials for the electrocatalytic 
oxidation of PET, coupled with the electrocatalytic reduction of CO2, to achieve the selective 
coproduction of high-value formic acid under lower voltage conditions (Figure 15a). NiCo2O4 
nanowires exhibited catalytic activity and selectivity for the electrocatalytic oxidation of PET 
hydrolyzate, showing a 200-mV reduction in the potential of the oxidation reaction compared 
to that of water oxidation at a catalytic current density of 50 mA·cm−2 (Figure 15b,c). 
Moreover, the catalytic reaction exhibited remarkable selectivity, with a Faradaic efficiency 
of the formic acid product reaching approximately 90% (Figure 15d). A two-electrode 
electrolyzer with NiCo2O4/CFP and SnO2/CC electrodes showed a decrease in the driving 
voltage upon the addition of 0.1 M PET hydrolysate, indicating effective reduction in the 
energy consumption associated with the OER (Figure 15e). The formic acid Faradaic 
efficiency reached approximately 85%, remaining stable at battery voltages below 2.0 V and 
thus highlighting the favorable reaction stability (Figure 15f). Investigation of the reaction 
mechanism revealed that oxalic acid was the primary product of glycolic acid oxidation, while 
formic acid was the main product of ethylene glycol oxidation over the NiCo2O4 
electrocatalyst, suggesting that glycolic acid was not a significant intermediate in ethylene 
glycol oxidation (Figure 15g). A proposed reaction pathway for the oxidation of ethylene 
glycol over NiCo2O4 electrocatalysts is presented based on these findings (Figure 15h). The 
coupling of waste plastic electrocatalysis with electrocatalytic CO2 conversion would enable 
the efficient upcycling of PET waste plastics, enhance the production rate of formic acid, and 
reduce CO2 emissions, thereby fostering the development of a carbon circular economy. It 
should be noted that although coupling with CO2 electrocatalysis can expand the application 
areas of PET plastic upcycling to a certain extent, the conversion to low-carbon chemical 
products will still lead to wastage of resources and limit the efficiency. 

 
27 
 
 
Figure 15. (a) Concurrent electrochemical conversion of anodic pet hydrolysate and cathodic 
CO2 to formic acid. (b) SEM and TEM images of the as-prepared NiCo2O4 material. (c) LSV 
curves at a scan rate of 10 mV/s of NiCo2O4/CFP in 1 M NaOH solutions with and without 0.1 
M PET hydrolysate. (d) FEs of PET hydrolysate oxidation to formic acid with different charges 
passed at the applied potential of 1.45 V; the inset shows the corresponding high-performance 
liquid chromatography (HPLC) chromatograms. (e) LSV curves for the SnO2||NiCo2O4 
electrolytic cell with and without the existence of 0.1 M PET hydrolysate in the anode cell. (f) 
Faradaic efficiencies of NiCo2O4/CFP for PET hydrolysate oxidation and SnO2/CC for the 
CO2RR to produce formic acid at different applied cell voltages. (g) HPLC of the glycolic acid 
oxidation products at a constant potential of 1.45 V with different amounts of charge passed. 
(h) Proposed reaction pathway for the electrochemical oxidation of ethylene glycol to formic 
acid. Reproduced with permission.[81] Copyright 2022, American Chemical Society. 
3.2.4 Electrocatalytically coupled multiple reactions for conversion to into C2+ products 
Converting carbon- and hydrogen-rich waste plastics into higher-value C2+ products can 
avoid energy wastage to a certain extent and enable high-value utilization of carbon resources, 
which is of great significance for realizing the upcycling process of waste plastics. Park  et 

 
28 
 
al.[82] reported a solar-driven biocatalytic system using non-recyclable real-world PET 
microplastics as electronic feedstocks to achieve C–H oxygen functionalization of bonds, 
amination of reducing C=O bonds, and trans-hydrogenation of C=C bonds (Figure 16a). 
Worm-like α-Fe2O3 structures were synthesized via hydrothermal deposition, and the 
influence of Zr doping on plastic reforming was investigated (Figure 16b). Results showed 
that the generation of formate and acetate was faster using a Zr:α-Fe2O3 photoanode than using 
a α-Fe2O3 photoanode in the voltage range of 0.8–1.2 V vs. RHE (Figure 16c). Moreover, at 
the same PET concentration, the Zr:α-Fe2O3 photoanode exhibited higher photoanode currents 
than α-Fe2O3 (Figure 16d). Consequently, this approach facilitated a stable biosynthetic 
reaction with a TTNrAaeUPO of 271,000 (7 h) (Figure 16e). This study proposes an 
electrocatalytically coupled bioenzymatic reaction that combines environmental remediation 
and biocatalytic photosynthesis for the sustainable synthesis of high-value chemicals. The 
multifaceted design based on an electrocatalytic process significantly enhances the efficiency 
of the selective conversion of waste plastics into high-carbon products. Furthermore, the 
multifunctional characteristics of the approach broaden its potential for practical applications. 
The current electrocatalytic processes mainly focus on the catalytic activity of PET because 
of its alkaline hydrolysis characteristics. However, research on the electrocatalytic effects of 
other high-polymer plastics is still lacking, which limits the application range of 
electrocatalytic reforming. Thus, exploring the electrocatalytic potential of other high-polymer 
plastics is essential for future development. 

 
29 
 
 
Figure 16. (a) Schematic diagram of solar-powered photoelectrochemical biosynthetic 
reactions using non-recyclable real-world PET microplastics. (b) Plan-view and cross-
sectional-view SEM images of α-Fe2O3 electrode. (c) Potential-dependent production rates of 
formate and acetate driven by α-Fe2O3 and Zr:α-Fe2O3 photoanodes. (d) Comparison of ΔIph of 
the haematite-based photoanodes at 1.1 VRHE. (e) Substrate scope of BPEC reactions using real-
world PET microplastics. Reproduced with permission.[82] Copyright 2022, Springer Nature. 
3.2.5 Other notable electrocatalytic plastic reforming technologies 
Electrocatalytic waste plastic upcycling is an appealing strategy, and current research 
focuses on achieving high current densities at low anodic potentials while maintaining a high 
Faradaic efficiency. A recent study by Chen et al.[83] introduced a novel electrocatalytic 
strategy using a Pd-modified Ni foam catalyst to directly convert waste PET into carbonate. 
The catalyst demonstrated excellent electrocatalytic activity for carbonate production, 
achieving a current density of 400 mA·cm−2 at 0.7 V vs. RHE. Furthermore, the system 
exhibited high selectivity (95%) and Faradaic efficiency (93%). Notably, this strategy 

 
30 
 
eliminates the need for alkali treatment of plastics and exhibits favorable economic and 
environmental characteristics. Considering the current research progress in plastic 
electrocatalysis (Table 4), it is evident that achieving highly selective conversion of waste into 
high-carbon, high-value-added chemicals is a future development direction in this field. 
Table 4. Electrocatalytic conversion of plastics over different catalysts. 
Category 
Catalysts 
Plastics 
Potential 
(V vs. RHE) 
FE 
(%) 
Products 
Selectivity 
Refs. 
C2+ 
CoNi0.25P 
PET 
1.70 
91.3 
potassium diformate 
and terephthalic acid 
>80% 
[76] 
Au/Ni(OH)2 
PET 
1.15 
96 
lactic acid and 
glycolic acid 
77 and 91% 
[79] 
Pd-Ni(OH)2/NF 
PET 
1.15 
86 
glycolic acid 
91.6 % 
[80] 
Pd/Ni 
PET 
0.70 
93 
carbonate 
95% 
[83] 
C1 
NiCo2O4 
PET 
1.55 
90 
formic acid 
>90% 
[81] 
CuO 
PET 
1.50 
90 
formic acid 
90% 
[84] 
Ni/CoP 
PET 
1.30 
96 
formic acid 
96% 
[85] 
The photoreforming of plastics utilizing solar energy is a promising technology for 
processing plastic wastes into higher-value chemicals, leveraging renewable solar energy.[86] 
This approach offers distinct efficiency and economic advantages over plastic 
photodegradation and closely aligns with the principles of sustainable development (Table 5). 
Compared to thermal catalytic conversion and electrocatalytic conversion, the photoreforming 
of plastics does not require additional energy input, resulting in lower costs and ensuring 
greater economic feasibility.[87] Currently, plastic photoreforming focuses on the production 
of high-value fuels, materials, and chemicals.[88] Achieving selective generation of these high-
value products is the primary research objective in the field of plastic photoreforming. 

 
31 
 
Table 5. Electrocatalytic conversion of plastics over different catalysts. 
Category 
Catalysts 
Plastics 
Light sources 
Times 
Products 
Refs. 
Photodegradation 
TiO2/CuPc 
PS 
Fluorescent light 
200 h 
CO2 
[89] 
Vitamin C-TiO2 
PVC 
UV light 
216 h 
CO2 
[90] 
TiO2 
PE 
Solar light 
200 h 
CO2 
[91] 
Photoreforming 
p-Toluenesulfonic 
PS 
Ultraviolet LEDs 
24 h 
formic acid 
[92] 
UO2(NO3)2·6H2O 
PS 
460 nm light 
72 h 
benzoic acid 
[93] 
ZnO/UiO66-NH2 
PVC/PLA 
Solar light 
35 h 
acetic acid 
[94] 
 
4.1 Photocatalytic conversion process and mechanism 
Photocatalytic reactions consist of three main processes. First, light irradiation occurs, upon 
which photocatalysts absorb photons and produce photogenerated electron-hole pairs. Second, 
the photogenerated carriers separate and migrate. Finally, a redox reaction of the 
photogenerated carriers occurs on the catalyst surface (Figure 17a).[95] From a thermodynamic 
perspective, the energies of the photogenerated carriers must align with the redox potential of 
the desired product, necessitating a suitable energy band structure (Figure 17c).[96] However, 
the absorption process requires photons with energies higher than the bandgap of the 
catalyst.[97] Thus, the bandgap of the photocatalyst should be as narrow as possible to 
maximize the absorption of visible light, which constitutes 43% of the solar spectrum (Figure 
17b).[98] In plastic photoreforming, a lower potential is required for plastic oxidation, allowing 
for a wider range of catalyst choices. Therefore, the selective photoreforming of plastics is 
primarily associated with catalyst design. 

 
32 
 
 
Figure 17. (a) Schematic diagram of photocatalytic processes. (b) Solar spectrum energy 
distribution. (c) Bandgaps and band edge positions of various semiconductors on a potential 
scale versus the normal hydrogen electrode (NHE). 
To achieve the highly selective photoreforming of plastics, it is necessary to explore catalyst 
optimization strategies with broader applicability. These strategies primarily involve the 
following. 1) Defect engineering: This approach focuses on introducing defects or heteroatoms 
to optimize the catalyst performance. By constructing active sites on the catalyst surface and 
optimizing its energy band structure, the energy barrier can be significantly reduced and the 
catalytic activity at the reaction center during the adsorption process can be improved (Figure 
18a).[99] 2) Loading of co-catalysts: Loading metals as co-catalysts can enhance charge 
transfer at the interface. Additionally, the surface plasmon resonance effect can be harnessed 
to adjust the redox potential of the photogenerated carriers (Figure 18b).[100] 3) Material 
hybrid strategies: Hybridizing photocatalysts with nonmetallic components, such as carbon-
based materials or metal oxides, can leverage the unique properties of different materials. This 
provides researchers with a powerful tool for manipulating light harvesting strategies, 
adsorption capacity, catalytic activity, and selectivity (Figure 18c).[101] 4) Band engineering 

 
33 
 
regulation: By constructing a properly matched energy band structure, an electric field can be 
created on the surface or interface, promoting the transfer of photogenerated carriers and 
significantly enhancing the catalytic activity (Figure 18d).[102] 
 
Figure 18. Schematic diagram of defect engineering (a), surface plasmon resonance effect (b), 
materials hybrid strategies (c) and constructing heterojunction (d). 
4.2 Overview of Recent Advances 
4.2.1 Photocatalytic conversion into fuels 
Plastic photoreforming offers a promising approach for generating green fuels, such as H2 
and CO.[103] One of the key advantages is the utilization of waste plastics as sacrificial agents 
for hole scavenging, which effectively suppresses the recombination of photogenerated 
charges and enhances the overall photocatalytic performance.[104] Furthermore, from a 
thermodynamic standpoint, the preparation of green fuels via plastic photoreforming requires 
less energy than water oxidation.[105] This significant thermodynamic advantage stems from 
the lower energy requirements for the oxidation of waste plastics. Consequently, the 
production of fuels via plastic photoreforming has garnered considerable attention. In a 
notable study, Reisner et al.[106] reported the use of a novel CdS/CdOx quantum dot catalyst 

 
34 
 
(Figure 19a) for the direct phototransformation of plastics in an alkaline solution to produce 
hydrogen. This breakthrough work demonstrates the successful conversion of various real-
world plastics, including PLA, PET, and PUR, into organic products (such as formate, acetate, 
and pyruvate) through hole oxidation, where photogenerated electrons reduce protons to 
generate hydrogen (Figure 19b). The results revealed that the prepared CdS-based catalyst 
exhibited hydrogen production activities of 64.3, 3.42, and 0.85 mmolH2·gCdS−1·h−1 for PLA, 
PET, and PUR, respectively (Figure 19c). Moreover, continuous and stable hydrogen 
production from the photoreforming of real PET water bottles was achieved with an activity 
of 4.13 mmolH2·gCdS−1·h−1 (Figure 19d). Simultaneous hydrogen production from plastic 
photoreforming not only represents a viable approach for converting environmental wastes 
into clean energy but also holds promise for addressing sustainability challenges. Although 
this process exhibits excellent hydrogen production performance, the complexity of the 
organic products limits their separation and utilization, which is against the ultimate goal of 
realizing the carbon cycle. 
 

 
35 
 
Figure 19. (a) The photocatalyst consisted of a semiconductor CdS coated with CdOx. Light 
absorption by CdS generates electrons and holes, which travel to the CdOx surface and mediate 
proton reduction and plastic oxidation, respectively. Reproduced with permission.[107] 
Copyright 2017, Springer Nature. (b) Diagram of the plastic photosynthesis process with a 
CdS/CdOx quantum dot photocatalyst in alkaline aqueous solution. (c) Photosynthesis from 
plastics into H2 using CdS/CdOx QDs under simulated solar light. (d) Long-term photosynthesis 
from PET bottles to H2 using CdS/CdOx QDs under simulated sunlight. Inset: photograph of 
PET bottle sample, H2 bubbles are visible on the plastic surface. Reproduced with 
permission.[106] Copyright 2018, The Royal Society of Chemistry. 
In addition to green hydrogen production, the conversion of plastics into CO fuels aligns 
well with the carbon circular economy strategies. Recently, Sun et al.[108] introduced a novel 
plastic photoreforming technology that utilized solar energy to achieve the sustainable 
conversion of plastic into syngas under ambient conditions (Figure 20a). By employing 
ultrathin Co-Ga2O3 nanosheets, the upcycling of non-recyclable plastics was successfully 
achieved under mild conditions (Figure 20b). The results demonstrate the effective 
photoreforming of commercial plastics, such as PE plastic bags, PP plastic boxes, and PET 
plastic bottles, into CO, while simultaneously photoreducing H2O to H2. Notably, PE plastic 
bags can be efficiently transformed into syngas using Co-Ga2O3 nanosheets in the presence of 
H2O, with H2 and CO production rates reaching 647.8 and 158.3 μmol·g−1·h−1, respectively 
(Figure 20c-e). The photochemical conversion of commercial plastics and water into syngas 
involves three key processes: photon absorption, H2O splitting to produce H2 and O2, and 
photodegradation of plastics into CO2 followed by CO formation through the *COOH 
intermediate (Figure 20f). This method offers a promising approach for transforming waste 
plastics into green fuels, contributing to the mitigation of white pollution and energy crises. 
However, compared to high-carbon chemicals, the added value of CO is low. Therefore, 
developing efficient methods for converting plastics into high-value-added products requires 
more attention for further advancements in this field. 

 
36 
 
 
Figure 20. (a) Schematic representations for the photoconversion of non-recyclable plastics 
into syngas. (b) TEM and AFM images of Co-Ga2O3 nanosheets. Photoconversion of (c) 
commercial PE plastic bags, (d) commercial PP plastic boxes and (e) commercial PET plastic 
bottles under simulated AM 1.5G solar irradiation at ambient temperature and pressure. (f) 
Schematic representation of the proposed mechanism for the photoconversion of non-
recyclable plastics into renewable syngas under mild conditions. Reproduced with 
permission.[108] Copyright 2022, Science Press. 
4.2.2. Photocatalytic conversion into materials 
In addition to the production of green fuels, researchers have explored the conversion of 
waste plastics into functional materials, which has garnered significant attention. 
Functionalizing the C–H bonds of plastics, rather than breaking these bonds, offers several 

 
37 
 
advantages, including lower energy requirements.[109] A recent study by Leibfarth et al.[110] 
presented a method for functionalizing the C−H bond of PS to generate electrophilic 
fluoroalkyl radicals under mild conditions (Figure 21a). Ru(bpy)3Cl2 and organic catalysts 
such as phenoxazines, phenothiazines, and dihydrophenazines (Figure 21b,c) were utilized to 
generate electrophilic fluoroalkyl radicals (Figure 21d,e). The fluorination of PS increased 
the water contact angle significantly, indicating an enhanced hydrophobicity (Figure 21f). The 
optimal catalyst loading concentration for achieving the desired reactivity and selectivity was 
1 mol% and 0.4 M 5,10-di(2-naphthyl)-5,10-dihydrophenazine (Figure 21g,h). Photocatalytic 
C-H alkylation is a promising route for converting plastic wastes into functional materials 
because of the relatively lower energy requirements for C-H bond activation. However, the 
limitations in the number of cycles and process control necessitate further exploration. 
 

 
38 
 
Figure 21. (a) Diagram of the functionalization of PS waste using electrophilic radicals under 
mild reaction conditions. (b) The structure of Ru(bpy)3Cl2. (c) The organocatalysts used in the 
perfluoroalkylation of PS. (d) Alternative perfluoroalkyl sources for polymer functionalization. 
Reproduced with permission.[110] Copyright 2019, The Royal Society of Chemistry. (e) 
Alternate acid anhydrides enable a greater diversity of functionality added to aromatic-
containing polymers. Reproduced with permission.[111] Copyright 2020, The Royal Society of 
Chemistry. (f) Contact angle measurements highlighting the increased hydrophobicity of a 
series of perfluoroalkylated PS, suitable for coating applications. Reproduced with 
permission.[110] Copyright 2019, The Royal Society of Chemistry. GPC traces from the 
trifluoromethylation of PS (g) using different concentrations of the catalyst 5,10-di(2-
naphthyl)-5,10-dihydrophenazine and (h) at different overall reaction concentrations 
Reproduced with permission.[111] Copyright 2020, The Royal Society of Chemistry. 
4.2.3 Photocatalytic conversion into chemicals 
As a carbon- and hydrogen-rich energy material, the conversion of plastics into high-value 
chemicals is important for reducing energy consumption. Plastic photoreforming, in contrast 
to thermal catalytic conversion, is advantageous because it does not require additional energy 
input and can be conducted under milder reaction conditions.[112] By harnessing renewable 
solar energy, plastic photoreforming enables precise cleavage of specific chemical bonds, 
resulting in high selectivity. In the plastic photoreforming reaction, solar radiation excites the 
photocatalyst, generating electron-hole pairs that participate in redox reactions at the material 
surface.[113] However, semiconductor photocatalysts often suffer from drawbacks such as the 
recombination of photogenerated carriers and slow reaction kinetics, which severely limit the 
conversion rate of waste plastics.[114]  
To address these challenges, Qiao et al.[115] introduced a defect-rich chalcogenide-coupled 
photocatalyst for the solar-driven plastic photoreforming of hydrogen and high-value 
chemicals. They successfully constructed a defect-rich nickel-based chalcogenphosphate-
coupled cadmium sulfide photocatalyst (d-NiPS3/CdS) (Figure 22a) that could 
simultaneously convert PLA and PET plastic wastes under ambient conditions, resulting in 
hydrogen production rates as high as 40 mmol·gcat−1·h−1 (Figure 22b,c). Importantly, the 
photoreforming reactions of waste PET plastic bottles and PLA plastic cups remained stable 

 
39 
 
for over 100 h (Figure 22d,e). The oxidation products of PLA during a continuous 9-h reaction 
were acetates and pyruvate-based products, including pyruvate and its derivatives, under 
alkaline conditions. The oxidation products of PET included formate, acetate, and glycolate 
(Figure 22f,g). The efficiency of the plastic photoreforming process is attributed to the rapid 
separation of photogenerated electron-hole pairs facilitated by d-NiPS3 nanosheets and 
efficient redox reactions at the defect-activated P and S sites on the photocatalyst surface 
(Figure 22h). This study provides new ideas for the design of efficient photocatalysts and 
sustainable conversion of plastics to high-value chemicals and green fuels. However, precise 
conversion of chemicals has not yet been achieved, posing a challenge for the effective 
utilization of complex products. Hence, this aspect requires further investigation. 
 
Figure 22. (a) Morphology and chemical composition for d-NiPS3 and d-NiPS3/CdS. Three 
runs of photoreforming for PLA (b) and PET (c) for H2 production by CdS, NiPS3/CdS, and d-
NiPS3/CdS under full-spectrum irradiation. (d) Consecutive H2 production via long-term 
photoreforming of PLA cup (upper) and PET bottle (lower) with the d-NiPS3/CdS photocatalyst. 
(e) Digital photograph of H2 evolution using the d-NiPS3/CdS film without and with 

 
40 
 
illumination. (f) Organic acid products from PLA and PET for CdS, NiPS3/CdS, and d-
NiPS3/CdS following 9 h of photoreforming. (g) 1H NMR spectra for substrates of PLA cups 
(upper) and PET bottles (lower) following photoreforming. Reproduced with permission.[115] 
Copyright 2023, American Chemical Society. 
The photoreforming of plastics into high-value chemicals is a promising strategy. However, 
the complex nature of the products often poses challenges in their effective separation and 
utilization.[116] Consequently, there is a growing focus on achieving highly selective 
conversion of plastics into carbon-rich chemicals. In a recent study, Xie et al.[29] introduced a 
strategy for the selective conversion of waste plastics into C2 chemicals via light-induced C–
C bond cleavage and coupling (Figure 23a). The use of an ultrathin Nb2O5 photocatalyst with 
an appropriate redox potential led to a significant increase in CH3COOH production from PE, 
PP, and PVC. (Figure 23b,c). The reaction mechanism, as elucidated by in situ FTIR 
spectroscopy, revealed a two-step process for the photoreforming of PE into CH3COOH 
(Figure 23d). This process involved the oxidative cleavage of C−C bonds by O2 and •OH to 
degrade long-chain molecules and generate CO2 monomers, which subsequently underwent 
reduction to produce CH3COOH. (Figure 23e). This study provides valuable insights into the 
two-step photoreforming mechanism for the conversion of plastics to chemicals. Optimization 
of the C−C bond cleavage and coupling processes to realize the selective photoreforming of 
plastic wastes into multi-carbon chemicals under natural environmental conditions will be a 
promising pathway for plastic upcycling. However, converting plastics to CO2 and utilizing 
this CO2 may lead to significant greenhouse gas emissions. Additionally, the two-step reaction 
process can limit the reaction rate. 

 
41 
 
 
Figure 23. (a) Schematic illustration for converting various waste plastics into C2 fuels by a 
designed two-step pathway under simulated natural environment conditions. (b) The yield of 
CH3COOH and (c) the evolution rates of CH3COOH and CO during the photoconversion of 
pure PE, PP, and PVC, as well as during the photoreduction of pure CO2 in water. (d) In-situ 
FTIR spectra for detecting the reaction intermediates during PE photoconversion under 
simulated natural environment conditions. (e) The proposed two-step C−C bond cleavage and 
coupling mechanism from pure PE into CH3COOH under simulated natural environment 
conditions. Reproduced with permission.[29] Copyright 2020, John Wiley and Sons. 
4.2.4. Other notable plastic photoreforming technologies 
In recent years, significant progress has been made in the field of plastic photoreforming. 
However, these developments are still in the early stages, leaving ample room for 
improvement in terms of practical prospects, product selectivity, reaction stability, and 
economic feasibility. Recently, Hyeon et al.[117] developed a floating photocatalytic platform 
comprising porous elastomer-hydrogel nanocomposites that demonstrated remarkable 
catalytic stability and potential for large-scale applications. By employing the Pt/TiO2 low-
temperature aerogel composite photocatalytic platform, plastic photoreforming experiments 

 
42 
 
were conducted on PET, resulting in high catalytic stability even in strongly alkaline solutions. 
The hydrogen production rate reached 3.45 mmol·h−1·m−2, enabling the transformation of PET 
into valuable chemicals. The elastomer-hydrogel nanocomposite-based floating photocatalytic 
platform enabled efficient light transmission, facilitated convenient gas separation, inhibited 
reverse oxidation, and significantly enhanced the photocatalytic performance. 
The implementation of multi-reaction coupling technology can further enhance the reaction 
rate and selectivity of plastic reforming. Reisner et al.[118] utilized the photoelectrochemical 
technology to achieve plastic reforming and CO2 reduction. A perovskite-based photocathode 
capable of integrating various CO2 reduction catalysts such as molecular cobalt porphyrin, 
Cu91In9 alloy, and formate dehydrogenase enabled the production of CO, syngas, and formate, 
respectively. Additionally, the Cu27Pd73 photoanode catalyst demonstrated high selectivity in 
alkaline solutions for the reforming of PET to glycolate. The performance of this system was 
comparable to that of an unbiased double photoabsorber, with a productivity approximately 
10-100 times higher than that in the photocatalytic process. The solar-driven 
photoelectrocatalytic technology presented in this study offers a viable and efficient approach 
to plastic reforming. A comprehensive overview of the research advancements in plastic 
photoreforming is presented in Table 6. Enhancing the photocatalytic efficiency and achieving 
highly selective reforming are currently the primary areas of research. These aspects are 
crucial for the practical application of the photocatalytic technology. 
 
 

 
43 
 
Table 6. Photocatalytic conversion of plastics over different catalysts. 
Catalysts 
Plastics 
Light Source 
Products 
Selectivity 
Refs. 
Nb2O5 
PP、PE、
PVC 
300 W Xe lamp with  AM 
1.5G filter 
acetic acid 
100% 
[116] 
CNx|Ni2P 
PET 
Xe lamp with AM 1.5G filter 
(100 mW·cm–2) 
acetate and 
formate 
100% 
[119] 
MoS2/CdS 
PLA 
300 W Xe lamp with  AM 
1.5G filter 
formate 
100% 
[120] 
C/g-C3N4 
/Methanosarcina 
PLA 
ultraviolet LEDs 
CH4 
100% 
[121] 
Fluorenone 
PS 
LED lamp 
benzoic acid 
100% 
[122] 
The conversion of plastic wastes into high-value products such as chemicals and green fuels 
through plastic reforming is a transformative strategy. However, it is still in its nascent phase, 
primarily because of the challenges related to reaction efficiency, economic viability, and 
product selectivity. In light of the recent advancements in plastic reforming, we conducted a 
comprehensive review and have presented an outlook on plastic upcycling (Figure 24). 
1)
Achieving milder reaction conditions and higher efficiency: Thermocatalytic 
conversion has been extensively explored for the reforming of plastics at lower 
temperatures. The optimization of catalytic materials, such as composite catalysts and 
ionic liquid catalysts, should be focused for enhancing the catalytic performance while 
reducing the use of precious metals. Additionally, field-assisted approaches, such as 
microwave field technology and pulse heating technology, have been employed to 
increase thermal catalytic reaction rates. These strategies offer promising pathways for 
practical thermocatalytic plastic conversions. In electrocatalytic conversion, reducing 
the energy consumption remains challenging. Achieving efficient depolymerization of 
plastics at a lower applied bias and higher Faradaic efficiency is essential for 

 
44 
 
minimizing reaction costs and enabling large-scale applications. Although 
photocatalytic conversion utilizes renewable solar energy, the need for strong alkali 
pretreatment and a relatively low reaction rate limits its broader application. Enhancing 
the catalytic ability of photocatalysts by loading co-catalysts or constructing 
heterojunctions can improve their overall performance. 
2)
Increasing selectivity in plastic reforming: High selectivity in plastic reforming is 
critical for realizing economical reactions, particularly for the production of high-value 
chemicals. Thermocatalytic conversion faces challenges because the precise breaking 
of specific chemical bonds under high-temperature conditions is difficult. The 
dissociation of C-C bonds at elevated temperatures leads to the formation of complex 
and low-value carbon monomers. Thus, catalysts should be selected such that they 
promote the interaction of plastic monomers on the catalyst surface. In the field of 
electrocatalysis, selective conversion is limited to plastic derivatives such as ethylene 
glycol. However, future trends aim to directly achieve the highly selective 
electrocatalytic reforming of plastics, without the need for derivative transformations. 
This requires the development of multi-reaction coupling processes in electrocatalysis 
to enhance the efficiency and achieve precise activation of the functional groups. For 
photocatalytic conversion, the development of low-cost and highly selective 
photocatalysts has been emphasized. Achieving high selectivity for the conversion of 
plastics into high-value chemicals is vital for practical applications. Photocatalysts with 
narrow bandgaps enhance the absorption of solar photons, whereas co-catalysts or 
heterojunctions promote charge separation and improve product selectivity.  
3)
Investigating the mechanism of plastic reforming: Understanding the conversion 
mechanism of plastics is essential for designing efficient reforming systems and 
achieving highly selective conversions. Advanced characterization techniques and 

 
45 
 
theoretical calculations have played crucial roles in providing profound insights into 
the reaction mechanisms and interaction pathways between plastics and catalyst 
surfaces. In situ characterization methods provide valuable insights into the 
fundamental aspects of reaction processes. However, the applicability of in situ 
characterization techniques is often limited to milder reaction conditions. Theoretical 
calculations were employed to simulate the evolution of the reaction process and gain 
a deeper understanding of the reaction pathways. Calculations are frequently utilized 
to study the activation process of plastic monomers, analyze the changes in the Gibbs 
free energy for the conversion from monomers to specific selective products, and 
evaluate the changes in the reaction barrier. Theoretical calculations serve as a valuable 
guide for achieving highly selective reforming of plastic. 
4)
Novel coupled plastic reforming strategy: The utilization of multicomponent coupling 
reactions is crucial for achieving multifunctional and efficient plastic reforming. Such 
strategies are currently viable for electrocatalytic and photocatalytic applications. 
Electrocatalytic plastic reforming occurs at the anode through a cathodic reaction 
involving proton reduction for hydrogen generation. Thus, the efficiency or production 
of high-value products can be enhanced by employing multi-reaction-coupling with 
CO2 reduction and biomass conversion. The coupling of plastic photoreforming with 
hydrogen generation offers thermodynamic advantages over direct water splitting. This 
can be expanded to include CO2 reduction, N2 fixation, metal recovery, and organic 
synthesis. External field coupling technologies (e.g., piezoelectric, magnetic, and 
ultrasonic fields) significantly enhance reaction efficiency and product selectivity. The 
synergistic effects of external field assistance also exert a notable influence on product 
selectivity.  

 
46 
 
 
Figure 24. Correlation analysis between upcycling processes and main evaluation 
characteristics towards practical application. Economic viability: the reaction cost. Reaction 
efficiency: the average reaction speed. Scalability: the potential coupled with other reactions. 
Product selectivity: the proportion of a specific product. Product income: the added value of 
the products. Development potential: the capability for further advance. Environmental impact: 
the potential pollution and damage to the environment. 
 

 
47 
 

 
48 
 
[1] 
C. Jehanno, J. W. Alty, M. Roosen, S. De Meester, A. P. Dove, E. Y. X. Chen, F. A. 
Leibfarth, H. Sardon, Nature 2022, 603, 803-814. 
[2] 
M. MacLeo, H. P. H. Arp, M. B. Tekman, A. Jahnke, Science 2021, 373, 61-65. 
[3] 
A. Stubbins, K. L. Law, S. E. Munoz, T. S. Bianchi, L. Zhu, Science 2021, 373, 51-55. 
[4] 
J. R. Jambeck, R. Geyer, C. Wilcox, T. R. Siegler, M. Perryman, A. Andrady, R. Narayan, 
K. L. Law, Science 2015, 347, 768-771. 
[5] 
L. C. M. Lebreton, J. Van der Zwet, J. W. Damsteeg, B. Slat, A. Andrady, J. Reisser, Nat. 
Commun. 2017, 8. 15611. 
[6] 
R. Geyer, J. R. Jambeck, K. L. Law, Sci. Adv. 2017, 3. 25–29. 
[7] 
A. Cozar, F. Echevarria, J. Ignacio Gonzalez-Gordillo, X. Irigoien, B. Ubeda, S. 
Hernandez-Leon, A. T. Palma, S. Navarro, J. Garcia-de-Lomas, A. Ruiz, M. L. 
Fernandez-de-Puelles, C. M. Duarte, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U.S.A. 2014, 111, 10239-
10244. 
[8] 
A. A. Koelmans, P. E. Redondo-Hasselerharm, N. H. M. Nor, V. N. de Ruijter, S. M. 
Mintenig, M. Kooi, Nat. Rev. Mater. 2022, 7, 138-152. 
[9] 
Q. Zhang, E. G. Xu, J. Li, Q. Chen, L. Ma, E. Y. Zeng, H. Shi, Environ. Sci. & Technol. 
2020, 54, 3740-3751. 
[10] 
N. P. Ivleva, Chem. Rev. 2021, 121, 11886-11936. 
[11] 
J. Gigault, H. El Hadri, B. Nguyen, B. Grassl, L. Rowenczyk, N. Tufenkji, S. Feng, M. 
Wiesner, Nat. Nanotechnol. 2021, 16, 501-507. 
[12] 
Y. Wang, Y. Yang, X. Liu, J. Zhao, R. Liu, B. Xing, Environ. Sci. & Technol. 2021, 55, 
15579-15595. 
[13] 
S. L. Wright, F. J. Kelly, Environ. Sci. & Technol. 2017, 51, 6634-6647. 
[14] 
A. Sangroniz, J.-B. Zhu, X. Tang, A. Etxeberria, E. Y. X. Chen, H. Sardon, Nat. Commun. 

 
49 
 
2019, 10. 3559. 
[15] 
A. J. Martin, C. Mondelli, S. D. Jaydev, J. Perez-Ramirez, Chem 2021, 7, 1487-1533. 
[16] 
M. Chu, Y. Liu, X. Lou, Q. Zhang, J. Chen, ACS Catal. 2022, 12, 4659-4679. 
[17] 
L. D. Ellis, N. A. Rorrer, K. P. Sullivan, M. Otto, J. E. McGeehan, Y. Roman-Leshkov, 
N. Wierckx, G. T. Beckham, Nat. Catal. 2021, 4, 539-556. 
[18] 
A. Rahimi, J. M. Garcia, Nat. Rev. Chem. 2017, 1. 46. 
[19] 
Y. Liu, Q. Zhong, P. Xu, H. Huang, F. Yang, M. Cao, L. He, Q. Zhang, J. Chen, Matter 
2022, 5, 1305-1317. 
[20] 
M. He, Y. Sun, B. Han, Angew. Chem.Int. Edit. 2022, 61. 
[21] 
M. Sachs, R. S. Sprick, D. Pearce, S. A. J. Hillman, A. Monti, A. A. Y. Guilbert, N. J. 
Brownbill, S. Dimitrov, X. Shi, F. Blanc, M. A. Zwijnenburg, J. Nelson, J. R. Durrant, 
A. I. Cooper, Nat. Commun. 2018, 9. 4968. 
[22] 
M.-Q. Zhang, M. Wang, B. Sun, C. Hu, D. Xiao, D. Ma, Chem 2022, 8, 2912-2923. 
[23] 
Y. Liu, X. Wang, Q. Li, T. Yan, X. Lou, C. Zhang, M. Cao, L. Zhang, T.-K. Sham, Q. 
Zhang, L. He, J. Chen, Adv. Funct. Mater. 2023, 33. 2210283. 
[24] 
A. W. Bosman, R. P. Sijbesma, E. W. Meijer, Mater. Today 2004, 7, 34-39. 
[25] 
M. Wang, F. Wang, Adv. Mater. 2019, 31. 1901866. 
[26] 
R. Cao, M. Q. Zhang, C. Hu, D. Xiao, M. Wang, D. Ma, Nat. Commun. 2022, 13. 4809. 
[27] 
G. Chang, Y. Zhao, X. Gao, Z. Li, H. Zhao, Chemical Communications 2022, 58, 7317-
7320. 
[28] 
J. Chen, J. Wu, P. C. Sherrell, J. Chen, H. Wang, W.-X. Zhang, J. Yang, Adv. Sci. 2022, 
9. 2103764. 
[29] 
X. Jiao, K. Zheng, Q. Chen, X. Li, Y. Li, W. Shao, J. Xu, J. Zhu, Y. Pan, Y. Sun, Y. Xie, 
Angew. Chem. Int. Edit. 2020, 59, 15497-15501. 
[30] 
O. Dogu, M. Pelucchi, R. Van de Vijver, P. H. M. Van Steenberge, D. R. D'Hooge, A. 
Cuoci, M. Mehl, A. Frassoldati, T. Faravelli, K. M. Van Geem, Prog. Energy Combust. 
Sci. 2021, 84. 100901. 
[31] 
K. Lee, Y. Jing, Y. Wang, N. Yan, Nat. Rev. Chem. 2022, 6, 635-652. 
[32] 
X. Jie, W. Li, D. Slocombe, Y. Gao, I. Banerjee, S. Gonzalez-Cortes, B. Yao, H. 
AlMegren, S. Alshihri, J. Dilworth, J. Thomas, T. Xiao, P. Edwards, Nat. Catal. 2020, 
3, 902-912. 
[33] 
H. Kang, J. Ma, S. Perathoner, W. Chu, G. Centi, Y. Liu, Chem. Soc. Rev. 2023. 
[34] 
J. Zhou, D. Sathe, J. Wang, J. Am. Chem. Soc. 2022, 144, 928-934. 

 
50 
 
[35] 
R.-X. Yang, K. Jan, C. T. Chen, W. T. Chen, K. C. W. Wu, Chemsuschem 2022, 15, 
2200171 
[36] 
S. L. Wong, N. Ngadi, T. A. T. Abdullah, I. M. Inuwa, Renew. & Sustain. Energy Rev. 
2015, 50, 1167-1180. 
[37] 
G. R. Jones, H. S. Wang, K. Parkatzidis, R. Whitfield, N. P. Truong, A. Anastasaki, J. 
Am. Chem. Soc. 2023, 145, 9898-9915. 
[38] 
N. Miskolczi, A. Angyal, L. Bartha and I. Valkai, Fuel Process. Technol. 2009, 90, 
1032–1040. 
[39] 
K.-H. Lee and D.-H. Shin, Waste Manage. 2007, 27, 168–176. 
[40] 
L. Dai, N. Zhou, H. Li, Y. Wang, Y. Liu, K. Cobb, Y. Cheng, H. Lei, P. Chen and R. 
Ruan, Sci. Total Environ. 2021, 771, 144995. 
[41] 
J. Zeaiter, Fuel 2014, 133, 276–282. 
[42] 
K. H. Lee, Polym. Degrad. Stab. 2008, 93, 1284–1289. 
[43] 
S. Liu, P. A. Kots, B. C. Vance, A. Danielson, D. G. Vlachos, Sci. Adv. 2021, 7. 8283. 
[44] 
P. Narksri, S. Angnanon, J. Guntasub, K. Wijitrattanatri, S. Kingputtapong, S. 
Phumpradit and N. Hinchiranan, Mater. Today: Proc. 2022, 57, 1040–1047. 
[45] 
F. Zhang, M. Zeng, R. D. Yappert, J. Sun, Y.-H. Lee, A. M. LaPointe, B. Peters, M. M. 
Abu-Omar, S. L. Scott, Science 2020, 370, 437-441. 
[46] 
B. Sun, J. Zhang, M. Wang, S. Yu, Y. Xu, S. Tian, Z. Gao, D. Xiao, G. Liu, W. Zhou, M. 
Wang, D. Ma, Nat. Sustain. 2023. s41893. 
[47] 
X. Jiao, K. Zheng, Z. Hu, S. Zhu, Y. Sun, Y. Xie, Adv. Mater. 2021, 33. 2005192. 
[48] 
W. Zhang, S. Kim, L. Wahl, R. Khare, L. Hale, J. Hu, D. M. Camaioni, O. Y. Gutierrez, 
Y. Liu, J. A. Lercher, Science 2023, 379, 807-811. 
[49] 
K. Zheng, Y. Wu, Z. Hu, S. Wang, X. Jiao, J. Zhu, Y. Sun, Y. Xie, Chem. Soc. Rev. 2023, 
52, 8-29. 
[50] 
S. Zhang, Q. Hu, Y.-X. Zhang, H. Guo, Y. Wu, M. Sun, X. Zhu, J. Zhang, S. Gong, P. 
Liu, Z. Niu, Nat. Sustain. 2023, s41893. 
[51] 
X. Wu, Z. Wang, D. Zhang, Y. Qin, M. Wang, Y. Han, T. Zhan, B. Yang, S. Li, J. Lai, L. 
Wang, Nat. Commun. 2021, 12, 4018. 
[52] 
S. Yue, L. Chen, M. Zhang, Z. Liu, T. Chen, M. Xie, Z. Cao, W. Han, Nano-Micro Lett. 
2021, 14, 15. 
[53] 
M. B. Gawande, V. D. B. Bonifacio, R. Luque, P. S. Branco, R. S. Varma, Chem. Soc. 
Rev. 2013, 42, 5522-5551. 

 
51 
 
[54] 
S. Ge, P. N. Y. Yek, Y. W. Cheng, C. Xia, W. A. W. Mahari, R. K. Liew, W. Peng, T.-Q. 
Yuan, M. Tabatabaei, M. Aghbashlo, C. Sonne, S. S. Lam, Renew. & Sustain. Energy 
Rev. 2021, 135, 110148. 
[55] 
E. Vazquez, M. Prato, ACS Nano 2009, 3, 3819-3824. 
[56] 
B. Baytekin, H. T. Baytekin, B. A. Grzybowski, Energy & Environ. Sci. 2013, 6, 3467-
3482. 
[57] 
Q. Dong, A. D. Lele, X. Zhao, S. Li, S. Cheng, Y. Wang, M. Cui, M. Guo, A. H. Brozena, 
Y. Lin, T. Li, L. Xu, A. Qi, I. G. Kevrekidis, J. Mei, X. Pan, D. Liu, Y. Ju, L. Hu, Nature 
2023, 616, 488-494. 
[58] 
S. Chen, A. Tennakoon, K.-E. You, A. L. L. Paterson, R. Yappert, S. Alayoglu, L. Fang, 
X. Wu, T. Y. Zhao, M. P. P. Lapak, M. Saravanan, R. A. A. Hackler, Y.-Y. Wang, L. Qi, 
M. Delferro, T. Li, B. Lee, B. Peters, K. R. R. Poeppelmeier, S. C. C. Ammal, C. R. R. 
Bowers, F. A. Perras, A. Heyden, A. D. D. Sadow, W. Huang, Nat. Catal. 2023, 6, 161–
173. 
[59] 
S. Kumagai, R. Yamasaki, T. Kameda, Y. Saito, A. Watanabe, C. Watanabe, N. Teramae, 
T. Yoshioka, Energy & Fuels 2020, 34, 2492-2500. 
[60] 
S. Lee, J. Lee, Y.-K. Park, ACS Sustain. Chem. & Eng. 2022, 10, 13972-13979. 
[61] 
L. S. Diaz-Silvarrey, K. Zhang, A. N. Phan, Green Chem. 2018, 20, 1813-1823. 
[62] 
J. E. Rorrer, G. T. Beckham, Y. Roman-Leshkov, JACS Au 2021, 1, 8-12. 
[63] 
P. A. Kots, S. Liu, B. C. Vance, C. Wang, J. D. Sheehan, D. G. Vlachos, ACS Catal. 
2021, 11, 8104-8115. 
[64] 
X. Jia, C. Qin, T. Friedberger, Z. Guan, Z. Huang, Sci. Adv. 2016, 2. e1501591. 
[65] 
L. Li, H. Luo, Z. Shao, H. Zhou, J. Lu, J. Chen, C. Huang, S. Zhang, X. Liu, L. Xia, J. 
Li, H. Wang, Y. Sun, J. Am. Chem. Soc. 2023, 145, 1847-1854. 
[66] 
J. Wang, X. Li, T. Zhang, Y. Chen, T. Wang, Y. Zhao, J. Phy. Chem. Lett. 2022, 13, 622-
627. 
[67] 
D. E. Fagnani, D. Kim, S. I. Camarero, J. F. Alfaro, A. J. McNeil, Nat. Chem. 2023, 15, 
222. 
[68] 
S. Chu, B. Zhang, X. Zhao, H. S. Soo, F. Wang, R. Xiao, H. Zhang, Advanced Energy 
Materials 2022, 12, 2200435 
[69] 
C. Tang, Y. Zheng, M. Jaroniec, S. Z. Qiao, Angew. Chem. Int. Edit. 2021, 60, 19572-
19590. 
[70] 
R. Anand, A. S. Nissimagoudar, M. Umer, M. Ha, M. Zafari, S. Umer, G. Lee, K. S. 

 
52 
 
Kim, Advanced Energy Materials 2021, 11, 2102388. 
[71] 
L. Chen, J.-T. Ren, Z.-Y. Yuan, Advanced Energy Materials 2023, 13, 2203720. 
[72] 
T. Tran-Phu, R. Daiyan, X. M. C. Ta, R. Amal, A. Tricoli, Adv. Funct. Mater. 2022, 32, 
2110020. 
[73] 
M. R. K. Estahbanati, X. Y. Kong, A. Eslami, H. S. Soo, Chemsuschem 2021, 14, 4152-
4166. 
[74] 
T. Ling, M. Jaroniec, S. Z. Qiao, Adv. Mater. 2020, 32, 2001866. 
[75] 
Y. Wang, X. Wang, M. Antonietti, Angew. Chem. Int. Edit. 2012, 51, 68-89. 
[76] 
H. Zhou, Y. Ren, Z. Li, M. Xu, Y. Wang, R. Ge, X. Kong, L. Zheng, H. Duan, Nat. 
Commun. 2021, 12, 4679. 
[77] 
M. Ashraf, N. Ullah, I. Khan, W. Tremel, S. Ahmad, M. N. Tahir, Chem. Rev. 2023, 123, 
4443-4509. 
[78] 
A. K. Mohanty, F. Wu, R. Mincheva, M. Hakkarainen, J.-M. Raquez, D. F. Mielewski, 
R. Narayan, A. N. Netravali, M. Misra, Nat. Rev. Methods Primers 2022, 2, 46. 
[79] 
Y. Yan, H. Zhou, S.-M. Xu, J. Yang, P. Hao, X. Cai, Y. Ren, M. Xu, X. Kong, M. Shao, 
Z. Li, H. Duan, J. Am. Chem. Soc. 2023, 145, 6144-6155. 
[80] 
F. Liu, X. Gao, R. Shi, Z. Guo, E. C. M. Tse, Y. Chen, Angew. Chem. Int. Edit. 2023. 
2300094. 
[81] 
J. Wang, X. Li, M. Wang, T. Zhang, X. Chai, J. Lu, T. Wang, Y. Zhao, D. Ma, ACS Catal. 
2022, 12, 6722-6728. 
[82] 
J. Kim, J. Jang, T. Hilberath, F. Hollmann, C. B. Park, Nat. Synth. 2022, 1, 776-786. 
[83] 
R. Shi, K.-S. Liu, F. Liu, X. Yang, C.-C. Hou, Y. Chen, Chem. Commun. 2021, 57, 
12595-12598. 
[84] 
T. Zhang, X. Li, J. Wang, Y. Miao, T. Wang, X. Qian, Y. Zhao, J. Hazard. Mater. 2023, 
450. 
[85] 
N. Wang, X. Li, M.-K. Hu, W. Wei, S.-H. Zhou, X.-T. Wu, Q.-L. Zhu, Appl. Catal. B-
Environ. 2022, 316. 
[86] 
T. Uekert, C. M. Pichler, T. Schubert, E. Reisner, Nat. Sustain. 2021, 4, 383-391. 
[87] 
M. Du, M. Xing, S. Kang, Y. Ma, B. Qiu, Y. Chai, Ecomat 2022, 4, 12259. 
[88] 
Y. Zhang, M.-Y. Qi, Z.-R. Tang, Y.-J. Xu, ACS Catal. 2023, 13, 3575-3590. 
[89] 
J. Shang, M. Chai, Y. Zhu, Environ. Sci. Technol. 2003, 37, 4494. 
[90] 
C. Yang, C. Gong, T. Peng, K. Deng, L. Zan, J. Hazard. Mater. 2010, 178, 152. 
[91] 
L. Zan, W. Fa and S. Wang, Environ. Sci. Technol. 2006, 40, 1681–1685. 

 
53 
 
[92] 
Z. Huang, M. Shanmugam, Z. Liu, A. Brookfield, E. L. Bennett, R. Guan, D. E. V. 
Herrera, J. A. Lopez-Sanchez, A. G. Slater, E. J. L. McInnes, X. Qi, J. Xiao, J. Am. 
Chem. Soc. 2022, 144, 6532-6542. 
[93] 
J. Meng, Y. Zhou, D. Li, X. Jiang, Science Bulletin 2023, 68, 1522. 
[94] 
J. Qin, Y. Dou, J. Zhou, V. M. Candelario, H. R. Andersen, C. Hélix-Nielsen, W. Zhang, 
Adv. Funct. Mater. 2023, 33, 2214839. 
[95] 
M. Xie, X. Fu, L. Jing, P. Luan, Y. Feng, H. Fu, Adv. Energy Mater. 2014, 4, 1300995. 
[96] 
W. A. Smith, I. D. Sharp, N. C. Strandwitz, J. Bisquert, Energy & Environ. Sci. 2015, 8, 
2851-2862. 
[97] 
L. Q. Jing, W. Zhou, G. H. Tian, H. G. Fu, Chem. Soc. Rev. 2013, 42, 9509-9549. 
[98] 
M. Li, H. Zhang, Z. Zhao, P. Wang, Y. Li, S. Zhan, Acc. Mater. Res. 2022, 4, 4-15. 
[99] 
L. Xiong, J. Tang, Adv. Energy Mater. 2021, 11. 2003216. 
[100] D. Zhang, P. Wang, J. Wang, Y. Li, Y. Xia, S. Zhan, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A. 2021, 
118, e2114729118. 
[101] Y.-Y. Wang, Y.-C. Liu, H. Sun, D.-S. Guo, Coord. Chem. Rev. 2019, 395, 46-62. 
[102] S. Zhu, D. Wang, Adv. Energy Mater. 2017, 7, 1700841. 
[103] T. Uekert, M. A. Bajada, T. Schubert, C. M. Pichler, E. Reisner, Chemsuschem 2021, 14, 
4190-4197. 
[104] C. Zhang, Q. Kang, M. Chu, L. He, J. Chen, Trends in Chem. 2022, 4, 822-834. 
[105] B. Xia, Y. Zhang, B. Shi, J. Ran, K. Davey, S.-Z. Qiao, Small Methods 2020, 4, 2000063. 
[106] T. Uekert, M. F. Kuehnel, D. W. Wakerley, E. Reisner, Energy & Environ. Sci. 2018, 11, 
2853-2857. 
[107] D. W. Wakerley, M. F. Kuehnel, K. L. Orchard, K. H. Ly, T. E. Rosser, E. Reisner, Nat. 
Energy 2017, 2, 17021. 
[108] J. Xu, X. Jiao, K. Zheng, W. Shao, S. Zhu, X. Li, J. Zhu, Y. Pan, Y. Sun, Y. Xie, Natl. 
Sci. Rev. 2022, 9, nwac011. 
[109] J. B. Williamson, S. E. Lewis, R. R. Johnson, III, I. M. Manning, F. A. Leibfarth, Angew. 
Chem. Int. Edit. 2019, 58, 8654-8668. 
[110] S. E. Lewis, B. E. Wilhelmy, F. A. Leibfarth, Chem. Sci. 2019, 10, 6270-6277. 
[111] S. E. Lewis, B. E. Wilhelmy, Jr., F. A. Leibfarth, Polymer Chem. 2020, 11, 4914-4919. 
[112] C. Wang, H. Han, Y. Wu, D. Astruc, Coord. Chem. Rev. 2022, 458, 214422. 
[113] S. Bhattacharjee, V. Andrei, C. Pornrungroj, M. Rahaman, C. M. Pichler, E. Reisner, 
Adv. Funct. Mater. 2022, 32, 2109313. 

 
54 
 
[114] X. Zhao, B. Boruah, K. F. Chin, M. Dokic, J. M. Modak, H. S. Soo, Adv. Mater. 2022, 
34, 2100843. 
[115] S. Zhang, H. B. Li, L. Wang, J. D. Liu, G. J. Liang, K. Davey, J. R. Ran, S. Z. Qiao, J. 
Am. Chem. Soc. 2023, 145, 6410-6419. 
[116] C. Y. Toe, C. Tsounis, J. Zhang, H. Masood, D. Gunawan, J. Scott, R. Amal, Energy & 
Environ. Sci. 2021, 14, 1140-1175. 
[117] W. H. Lee, C. W. Lee, G. D. Cha, B.-H. Lee, J. H. Jeong, H. Park, J. Heo, M. S. 
Bootharaju, S.-H. Sunwoo, J. H. Kim, K. H. Ahn, D.-H. Kim, T. Hyeon, Nat. 
Nanotechnol. 2023. 
[118] S. Bhattacharjee, M. Rahaman, V. Andrei, M. Miller, S. Rodríguez-Jiménez, E. Lam, C. 
Pornrungroj, E. Reisner, Nat. Synth. 2023, 2, 182-192. 
[119] T. Uekert, H. Kasap, E. Reisner, J. Am. Chem. Soc. 2019, 141, 15201-15210. 
[120] M. Du, Y. Zhang, S. Kang, X. Guo, Y. Ma, M. Xing, Y. Zhu, Y. Chai, B. Qiu, ACS Catal. 
2022, 12, 12823-12832. 
[121] J. Ye, Y. Chen, C. Gao, C. Wang, A. Hu, G. Dong, Z. Chen, S. Zhou, Y. Xiong, Angew. 
Chem. Int. Edit. 2022, 61, 2213244. 
[122] S. Oh, E. E. Stache, J. Am. Chem. Soc. 2022, 144, 5745-5749. 
 
 

 
55 
 
Herein, a comprehensive overview of innovative catalytic technologies for the selective 
upcycling of plastic waste into high-value products is provided, including thermocatalysis, 
electrocatalysis and photocatalysis. Special attention is given to elucidating the mechanisms of 
plastic conversion and the design of catalysts.  
 
 
TOC figure 
 
 
 
