AI-guided inverse design and discovery of recyclable
vitrimeric polymers
Yiwen Zheng1, Prakash Thakolkaran2, Agni K. Biswal1, Jake A. Smith3,4, Ziheng Lu3,
Shuxin Zheng3, Bichlien H. Nguyen3,4*, Siddhant Kumar2*, and Aniruddh Vashisth1*
1Department of Mechanical Engineering, University of Washington, Seattle, WA, USA
2Department of Materials Science and Engineering, Delft University of Technology, Delft, The Netherlands
3Microsoft Research AI4Science
4Paul G. Allen School of Computer Science and Engineering, University of Washington, Seattle, WA, USA
*bnguy@microsoft.com, sid.kumar@tudelft.nl, vashisth@uw.edu
ABSTRACT
Vitrimer is a new, exciting class of sustainable polymers with the ability to heal due to their dynamic covalent adaptive network
that can go through associative rearrangement reactions. However, a limited choice of constituent molecules restricts their
property space, prohibiting full realization of their potential applications. To overcome this challenge, we couple molecular
dynamics (MD) simulations and a novel graph variational autoencoder (VAE) machine learning model for inverse design of
vitrimer chemistries with desired glass transition temperature (Tg) and synthesize a novel vitrimer polymer. We build the first
vitrimer dataset of one million chemistries and calculate Tg on 8,424 of them by high-throughput MD simulations calibrated
by a Gaussian process model. The proposed novel VAE employs dual graph encoders and a latent dimension overlapping
scheme which allows for individual representation of multi-component vitrimers. By constructing a continuous latent space
containing necessary information of vitrimers, we demonstrate high accuracy and efficiency of our framework in discovering
novel vitrimers with desirable Tg beyond the training regime. To validate the effectiveness of our framework in experiments, we
generate novel vitrimer chemistries with a target Tg = 323 K. By incorporating chemical intuition, we synthesize a vitrimer with
Tg of 311-317 K, and experimentally demonstrate healability and flowability. The proposed framework offers an exciting tool for
polymer chemists to design and synthesize novel, sustainable vitrimer polymers for a facet of applications.
Introduction
Polymers are essential to a broad range of applications from cars and wind turbines to smartphones, medical devices
and more; however their performance decreases over their life-cycle initiated by bond breaking at the molecular
scale due to high stress, oxidation, or other factors. Mechanical damage due to the rupturing of covalent bonds in
traditional thermosets and thermoplastics is irreversible, resulting in crack formation and finally failure1. In such
circumstances, plastics end up in waste streams due to the inability to serve the desired purpose, which presents two
key challenges for sustainability. First, failure in repairing mechanical damage means polymer parts and often entire
assemblies must be replaced, resulting in high economic cost and further increasing the 430 million tons of plastic
produced annually. Second, the inability of polymers to repair molecular damage poses a fundamental challenge
preventing recycling of thermosets altogether and the degradation of thermoplastics such as PET water bottles into
highly degraded secondary raw materials.
Healable polymers, particularly a new class called vitrimers, offer a potential solution to the plastic waste problem.
Combining durability with end-of-life recyclability, vitrimers have the potential to greatly reduce the amount of
plastic production and waste2. The defining molecular feature of vitrimers is associative dynamic covalent adaptive
network (CAN) which allows the constituents of polymer chains to attach to and detach from each other while
conserving crosslinking density under an external stimulus such as heat. This gives vitrimers the ability of self-healing
without loss of viscosity3 (Figure 1a). This exchange of constituents is termed a rearrangement reaction, and polymer
scientists have found multiple reaction chemistries on which to base vitrimers, including transesterification, disulfide
exchange, and imine exchange4. However, available vitrimers have restricted thermo-mechanical properties due
to limited commercially available monomers (i.e., building blocks) for synthesizing these polymers, which is a key
impediment to widespread applications of vitrimers.
The structure-property relationships of polymers have been primarily investigated in a forward manner: given
a set of polymers, one queries their properties by experiments and simulations5,6. At the early stage, most of
arXiv:2312.03690v4  [cond-mat.mtrl-sci]  6 Sep 2024

Molecular design space of vitrimers
a
Carboxylic acid
Epoxide
1 million 
vitrimers
50,000 acids
…
…
50,000 epoxides
b
Molecular dynamics – machine learning 
framework
Tg
Tg = 381 K
Tg = 486 K
Tg = 308 K
c
Discovery of novel vitrimers with 
desirable Tg
Tg = 248 K
Tg = 569 K
d
Synthesis with chemical intuition
Target Tg = 323 K
Chemical
intuition
Experimental
synthesis
Experimental
Tg = 311 - 317 K
Figure 1. Schematic overview of this work. (a) A transesterification vitrimer comprises a carboxylic acid and
an epoxide. The reversible covalent bond between acid and epoxide allows them to detach from and attach to each
other, thus healing the polymer. The design space for vitrimers is defined as all possible combinations of 50,000
carboxylic acids and 50,000 epoxides and a vitrimer dataset is built by sampling from the design space. (b) We use
calibrated MD simulations to calculate Tg on a subset of vitrimers. The vitrimer dataset and Tg are inputs to the
VAE model. (c) By optimizing latent vectors according to desirable Tg, novel vitrimers with Tg = 569 K and 248 K
are discovered. (d) Synthesis of novel vitrimer chemistry proposed by the framework for target Tg of 323 K (50 °C).
the novel polymers are discovered and synthesized based on chemical intuition in a trial-and-error fashion7. As
chemical synthesis of polymers is expensive and time consuming, virtual specimen fabrication and characterization
of desired chemical structures using molecular dynamics (MD) simulations may be employed to reduce the cost
of experimentation. MD is a simulation technique situated at the interface of quantum mechanics and classical
mechanics and has been widely employed to assist the discovery process8. Virtual characterization using MD has
helped in gaining insights about the effect of polymer molecular structures on mechanical properties9, glass transition
temperature10 and self-healing11. However, scaled computational screens assisted by MD or other simulation methods
remain costly, even with the development of high-performance computing12. As a result, the searchable design space
is limited to the order of 103 to 105 compositions.
Advances in machine learning (ML) algorithms offer an opportunity to accelerate polymer discovery by learning
from available data, revealing hidden patterns in material properties13 and reducing the need for costly experiments
and simulations14. Various ML methods have been employed to design organic molecules and polymers, including
forward predictive models15–18, generative adversarial networks19–21, variational autoencoders (VAEs)22–26, diffusion
models27,28 and large language models29. The trained ML models can be further used for high-throughput screening
or conditioned upon physical properties to achieve the inverse design of polymers from properties of interest, such as
glass transition temperature (Tg)16,17, thermal conductivity18,30,31, bandgap25 and gas-separation properties18,32.
The success in these ML models depends on the choice of suitable representations, which is challenging due to
the discrete and undefined degrees of freedom of molecules and polymers. To date, researchers have employed
strings33,34, molecular fingerprints35 and graphs36 to represent molecules and monomers in ML models. In this work,
we propose a graph VAE model employing dual graph encoders and overlapping latent dimensions37,38 which enable
representation of multi-component vitrimers and controlled design of selective components simultaneously.
Last few years have seen an increased contribution to structures and properties databases of polymers and
molecules such as ZINC1539, ChemSpider40 and PubChem41. However, a dataset of vitrimers to train such a deep
generative model is lacking. Furthermore, part of the dataset needs to be associated with the property of interest to
enable property-guided inverse design. Vitrimers are characterized by two key thermal properties: glass transition
temperature (Tg) and topology freezing temperature (Tv). Tg describes the transition from glassy state to rubbery
state while Tv describes the transition from viscoelastic solids to viscoelastic liquids. At service temperatures,
vitrimers perform like traditional polymers, but when heated to Tv, the chains gain mobility and carry out exchange
2/16

reactions at the reactive sites. Traditionally, vitrimer polymers exhibit Tv > Tg11,42; this makes their future
application easier since Tg dictates design protocols, and healing in vitrimers happens at temperatures higher than
Tg. Therefore, in this work, we focus our efforts on designing vitrimers with targeted Tg. We build the first vitrimer
dataset derived from the online database ZINC1539 and calculate Tg by calibrated MD simulations on a subset of
vitrimers (Figure 1a,b).
Leveraging this vitrimer dataset, we build an integrated MD-ML framework for discovery of bifunctional
transesterification vitrimers with desirable properties specifically targeted Tg for the scope of this work (Figure 1b).
Each vitrimer contains two reactive constituents (i.e., carboxylic acid and epoxide). Furthermore, the discrete nature
of the molecules prohibits a smooth and continuous design space. For example, while molecules are interpretable to
human, they are not interpretable to a numerical optimizer for design of vitrimers. To this end, we develop a VAE
that receives as input a vitrimer represented by graphs and subgraphs of the constituents and produces a smooth
and continuous latent space. In such a latent space, two similar vitrimers are located close to each other while an
optimizer can traverse the space of all possible vitrimers. Our unique VAE framework offers both constituent-specific
and joint latent spaces of the chemical constituents, i.e., continuous screening and optimization can be performed
on just one or both of the constituents. This enables interpretability on the effects of optimizing over, e.g., acid
only, epoxide only, or simultaneously acid and epoxide molecules. The efficacy of the framework is demonstrated by
discovering novel vitrimers with Tg both within and well beyond the dataset. Specifically, while the Tg in the training
data ranges from 250 K to 500 K, we discover vitrimers with Tg around 569 K and 248 K (Figure 1c). To validate
the framework predictions, we generate vitrimer chemistries with a Tg of 323 K (50 °C). We choose this Tg range to
develop vitrimers comparable to commonly used polyamides that find applications in transportation, electronics,
consumer goods, and packaging. We examine the top candidates suggested by framework and use chemical intuition
to further ensure simpler synthesizability and thermodynamic stability (Figure 1d). The novel, synthesized vitrimer
is characterized and experimental Tg is in good agreement with inverse design target Tg. This validates the proposed
framework, which is sufficiently general to be applied to different types of vitrimers and their properties, as a tool
for polymer chemists to discover and synthesize novel vitrimer chemistries with desirable properties.
Results
Design space and data generation
We begin by creating a vitrimer dataset to train the VAE model. Since there are only a few available bifunctional
transesterification vitrimers recorded in literature, we create a dataset of hypothetical vitrimers by combining
carboxylic acids and epoxides. We first build two datasets by collecting available bifunctional carboxylic acids
and epoxides from the online chemical compound database ZINC1539. To further broaden the chemical space,
we augment the datasets by adding hypothetical carboxylic acids and epoxides derived from available alcohols,
olefins and phenols in the ZINC15 database. In both datasets, molecules satisfying all following rules are kept: (i)
Carboxylic acid and epoxide-containing monomers have exactly two occurrences of their defining functional group (to
restrict compositions to linear chains). (ii) Molecules with molecular weight smaller than 500 g/mol (to restrict the
sizes of the molecular graphs and facilitate training of the graph VAE). (iii) Molecules with C, H, N, O elements only
(to emulate the existing transesterification vitrimers). After filtering, two datasets of around 322,000 carboxylic acids
and 625,000 epoxides are constructed. To ensure synthesizability, we select the 50,000 acids and 50,000 epoxides with
lowest synthetic accessibility (SA) scores43 (i.e., those predicted to be easiest to synthesize). The final dataset is
built by randomly sampling one million vitrimers from the design space of 2.5 billion possible combinations between
the selected acids and epoxides, as shown in Figure 2a.
To achieve property-guided inverse design, we further compute Tg of the vitrimers. Since MD simulations of the
entire one-million dataset are computationally intractable, we calculate Tg of 8,424 vitrimers randomly sampled
from the dataset. The quantity can cover a sufficient amount of vitrimers in the design space as well as keep the
computational cost to a reasonable level. For each vitrimer, we create a virtual specimen then minimize and anneal
the structure to remove local heterogeneities by slowly heating it to 800 K. A snapshot of the annealed system of an
example vitrimer (adipic acid and bisphenol A diglycidyl ether) is shown in Figure 2a. The annealed structure is
held at 800 K for an additional 50 ps and five specimens separated by 10 ps are obtained. To measure densities at
different temperatures for Tg calculation, each specimen is cooled down from 800 K to 100 K linearly in steps of 10
K. By fitting a bilinear regression to the density-temperature profile, we calculate Tg as the intersection point of the
two linear regressions (Figure 2a). Five replicate simulations are carried out from each specimen to reduce the noise
due to the stochastic nature of MD. The distributions of average Tg and coefficient of variation (i.e., ratio of the
standard deviation to the mean) in Tg of the vitrimers calculated by the five replicate MD simulations are shown
in Supplementary Figures 2a and 2b, respectively. The coefficients of variation in Tg of most of the vitrimers are
3/16

a
Vitrimer dataset
1 million 
vitrimers
50,000 acids
…
…
50,000 epoxides
MD simulations
C
O
H
8,424 vitrimers
randomly
sampled
Generating vitrimer Tg data
b
Training GP model
...
...
Gaussian
Process
ΔTg
c
Calibrating vitrimer Tg data
...
Trained
GP
ΔTg
+
ΔTg
before calibration
mean 423 K
after calibration
mean 373 K
Figure 2. Data generation by MD simulations and calibration by GP model. (a) The vitrimer dataset is
obtained by randomly sampling one million combinations between 50,000 bifunctional carboxylic acids and 50,000
epoxides derived from the ZINC15 database. MD simulations are carried out to calculate Tg on a subset of 8,424
vitrimers. (b) We train a GP model to predict experiment-MD difference ∆Tg with a training set of 295 polymers
with experimental Tg in literature. (c) Using the trained GP model, we calibrate MD-calculated Tg of the vitrimer
dataset. The calibrated Tg, serving as a proxy of experimental Tg, is the design target of this work.
below 0.1 with only a few around 0.15, indicating the low uncertainty in our MD simulations. More details on MD
simulations are provided in Supplementary Note 1.
Due to the large difference in the cooling rate between MD simulations and experiments, MD-calculated Tg is
typically overestimated compared with experimental measurements. Compensating for this artifact, Afzal et al.
have achieved good correlation between MD-simulated Tg and experimental Tg on 315 polymers using ordinary least
squares44. However, we find empirically that a simple two-parameter linear fit is insufficient to reduce the effect of
larger noise in our MD simulations with smaller systems and fewer replicates (see Supplementary Figure 3c). Instead,
we employ a Gaussian process (GP) regression model to calibrate MD calculations against available experimental
data. GP is a probabilistic model that uses a kernel (covariance) function to make probabilistic predictions based on
the distance between the queried data point and a training set45. In order to construct a training dataset for the GP
model, we gather 292 polymers from the Bicerano Handbook46 and the Chemical Retrieval on the Web (CROW)
polymer database47, each with documented experimental Tg. If the same polymer appears in both literature sources
with different recorded Tg, the average of both values is calculated as final Tg. The available experimental data
of three bifunctional transesterification vitrimers11,48,49 is also included and the dataset contains 295 polymers in
total. We compute Tg for this experimental polymer dataset using the MD protocols described above and calculate
the experiment-MD difference ∆Tg for each of these polymers. To numerically represent both the polymers within
the training set and the vitrimers to be calibrated as inputs for the GP model, we apply extended-connectivity
fingerprints (ECFPs)35 to the repeating units of the polymers, where asterisks (*) indicate connection points. We
train the GP model to predict ∆Tg from molecular fingerprints, as shown in Figure 2b. The calibrated Tg is defined
as
Tg = T MD
g
+ ∆T GP
g
,
(1)
where T MD
g
is the MD-calculated Tg and ∆T GP
g
is the experiment-MD Tg difference predicted by the GP model.
4/16

Acid: 𝒢a
Epoxide: 𝒢e
Graph encoders:
𝒬𝜙a
a , 𝒬𝜙𝑒
𝑒
Probabilistic latent space
Graph decoders:
𝒫𝜃a
a , 𝒫𝜃𝑒
𝑒
Acid: 𝒢𝑎′
Epoxide: 𝒢𝑒′
Properties: Tg
Property
predictor:
ℱ𝜔
𝒛a
𝒛e
𝝁e
(log 𝝈e2)
𝝁a
(log 𝝈a2)
𝝁
(log 𝝈2)
𝒛
 
 
 
  
 
  
 
 
  
  
 
  
 
 
  
  
 
 
 
  
Figure 3. Illustration of the VAE model. The encoders convert acid and epoxide molecules into latent vectors z
in a continuous latent space. The latent vectors z are further decoded into acid and epoxide molecules by the
decoders. A property predictor is added to predict Tg from z.
More details on molecular fingerprints and the kernel function are provided in Supplementary Note 2.
To evaluate the performance of our GP model, we implement leave-one-out cross validation (LOOCV). In this
process, we train our GP model on all data points in the training set except one point and predict its calibrated Tg.
We repeat this process for all 295 polymers in the training set and compare the calibrated Tg with experimental Tg
recorded in literature. The mean absolute error (MAE) is 28.07 K (Supplementary Figure 3), which is comparable to
the results by Afzal et al.44 (MAE = 27.35 K) with larger systems and longer simulation time. The error is partially
attributed to inconsistencies in recorded experimental Tg between the two literature sources46,47. Experimentally
measured Tg values for some polymers (such as polypropylene, polyvinylcyclohexane, etc.) differ by approximately 30
K gathered from two literature sources46,47. By utilizing the comprehensive GP model trained on the entire training
dataset without LOOCV, we proceed to calibrate Tg of the vitrimer dataset calculated by MD simulations. The
distributions of Tg of the vitrimers before and after GP calibration are shown in Figure 2c and both distributions
approach Gaussian. The average Tg before and after calibration is 423 K and 373 K, respectively. Since the cooling
rate in our MD simulations is 12 orders of magnitude higher than typical experiments, the difference of 50 K is
consistent with the Williams–Landel–Ferry theory that estimates an increase in Tg of 3 to 5 K per order of magnitude
increase in the cooling rate50. Ten vitrimers with highest and lowest calibrated Tg are shown in Supplementary
Figure 4, indicating the wide chemical and property space covered by the dataset. In this work, we denote Tg as the
calibrated value from MD simulations, which serves as a proxy of the true experimental Tg. It is also the input to
the variational autoencoder and target of inverse design.
Variational autoencoder
The discrete nature of molecules makes it challenging for the generative model to learn a continuous latent space
from discrete data of vitrimers. Any two molecules can have different degrees of freedom (e.g., number of atoms
and bonds) and extra attention needs to be paid to the choice of representations. Here we adopt the hierarchical
graph representation of molecules developed by a Jin et al.24. A molecule is first represented as a graph G = (V, E)
with atoms as nodes V and bonds as edges E. We decompose the molecule G into n motifs M1, ..., Mn. Each motif
Mi = (Vi, Ei) where i ∈{1, ..., n} is a subgraph with atoms Vi and edges Ei. The ensuing step involves a three-level
hierarchical graph representation (see Supplementary Figure 5 for a schematic illustration). The motif level GM
establishes macroscopic connections in a tree-like structure, the attachment level GA encodes inter-motif connectivity
via shared atoms, and the atom level G captures finer atomic relationships. More details about the hierarchical
graph representation are presented in Supplementary Note 3.1.
We use a variational autoencoder (VAE) comprising two pairs of hierarchical encoders and decoders associated
with the hierarchical representations of acid and epoxide molecules, respectively. A schematic of the framework is
presented in Figure 3. Each of the hierarchical encoder uses three message passing networks (MPNs) to encode
the graphs from each of the three levels. The acid encoder Qa
ϕa (with trainable parameters ϕa) maps the molecular
graph of the acid molecule Ga into a pair of vectors µa ∈Rda and log σa2 ∈Rda of dimension da, which are the
mean and logarithm variance of a Gaussian distribution. Similarly, µe ∈Rde and log σe2 ∈Rde of dimension de are
converted from the epoxide molecule Ge by the epoxide encoder Qe
ϕe.
5/16

We employ the attributed network embedding method37,38 to obtain the unified mean µ and log variance log σ2
of dimension d embedding information of the acid and epoxide as well as their unified effects as follows. We define
dae = da + de −d denoting the overlapping dimensions of µa and µe and calculate µ by
µ =


µa
1
...
µa
da−dae


|
{z
}
acid-specific
⊕1
2





µa
da−dae+1
...
µa
da

+


µe
1
...
µe
dae





|
{z
}
shared
⊕


µe
dae+1
...
µe
de


|
{z
}
epoxide-specific
,
(2)
where ⊕denotes vector concatenation. The unified log variance vector log σ2 is obtained similarly. Partially
overlapping latent dimensions enable both independent and joint control as well as interpretability of embeddings of
acid and epoxide. When exploring the latent space and optimizing latent vectors for new vitrimers later, it also
allows us to change one part of the vitrimer but keep the other one unaltered.
The unified mean µ and variance σ2 together describe a diagonal multivariate Gaussian distribution
z ∼N
 µ1, ..., µd
⊺, diag
 σ2
1, ..., σ2
d
⊺
,
(3)
where z is the latent vector (representation) of dimension d encoding necessary information of both input graphs Ga
and Ge. To keep differentiability and facilitate the training of VAE, the reparameterization trick51 is used to sample
the latent vector z from µ and σ2 by
z = µ + ϵ ⊙

σ2
1, ..., σ2
d
⊺,
(4)
where ϵ ∼N(0, I) is a vector of dimension d and ⊙denotes element-wise multiplication. The acid decoder Pa
θa
(with trainable parameters θa) is used to output the acid molecule Ga′ from the acid-specific and shared dimensions
of z. Similarly, the epoxide decoder Pe
θe is used to output the epoxide molecule Ge′ from the epoxide-specific and
shared dimensions of z. More specifically, the decoders iteratively expand the graphs at three hierarchical levels. At
step t, three multilayer perceptrons (MLPs) are used to predict the probability distributions of each motif node
p′
Mt, attachment node p′
At and atoms to be attached p′
(u,v)t (see Supplementary Note 3.2 for more details). An
additional MLP is used to predict the probability of backtracing p′
bt, i.e., when there will be no new neighbors to
add to the motif node. Both decoders are optimized to accurately reconstruct the molecules, i.e., Ga′ ≈Ga and
Ge′ ≈Ge. Practically this is achieved by minimizing the error between all four predicted probability distributions
with respect to the one-hot encoded ground truth, i.e., pMt, pAt, p(u,v)t and pbt for t = 1, ..., tmax where tmax
is the maximum number of iterations based on depth-first search of the input molecule (here for simplicity we
omit superscripts a and e denoting acid and epoxide). Encoding input vitrimers as described here introduces an
information bottleneck52 within the latent representation. This bottleneck selectively retains necessary information
required for accurate vitrimer reconstruction while largely reducing the dimensionality and complexity of original
data. As a result, vitrimers with similar compositions occupy proximate positions in the latent space.
In order to achieve data-driven design and uncover novel vitrimers with the interested property, we establish a
connection between the latent space and Tg. This is accomplished by employing a neural network surrogate model
that takes the latent vectors as inputs and outputs Tg. Consequently, we modify the original VAE architecture and
establish a projection from the latent space to Tg by incorporating the latent vectors z into a property prediction
model Fω (with trainable parameters ω). Thereby, the predicted property is
T ′
g = Fω(z).
(5)
We collect two subsets from the vitrimer dataset, one with N vitrimers lacking property labels D = {(Ga(i), Ge(i)) :
i = 1, ..., N}, and one with Nprop vitrimer and Tg pairs Dprop = {(Ga(i), Ge(i), T (i)
g ) : i = 1, ..., Nprop}. Due to the
large difference between N and Nprop (999,000 vs. 7,424), we first train the VAE on an unsupervised basis with D
and the property predictor is not optimized. Specifically,
θa, θe, ϕa, ϕe ←arg min
θa,θe,ϕa,ϕe
N
X
i=1

CE

p(i)
M
′, p(i)
M

+ CE

p(i)
A
′, p(i)
A

+ CE

p(i)
(u,v)
′, p(i)
(u,v)

+ BCE

p(i)
b
′, p(i)
b

|
{z
}
reconstruction loss
+ λKL
1
N
N
X
i=1
DKL

N
h
µ(i)
1 , ..., µ(i)
d
i⊺
, diag
h
σ(i)
1
2, ..., σ(i)
d
2i⊺
∥N (0, I)

|
{z
}
Kullback–Leibler divergence
,
(6)
6/16

where CE and BCE denote cross entropy loss and binary cross entropy loss53, respectively. For simplicity, the
subscript t and superscripts a and e are omitted and all terms in reconstruction loss represent the sum over all
decoding steps and over acid and epoxide. λKL > 0 is the regularization weight for Kullback–Leibler divergence.
Training the VAE with D aims to construct well-trained encoders and decoders capable of accommodating a diverse
array of vitrimers. The reconstruction loss ensures the accurate reconstruction of the encoded vitrimers with respect
to both acid and epoxide molecules by the VAE. The Kullback–Leibler divergence (KLD)54 is a statistical measure to
quantify how different two distributions are from each other. Hence, by employing it as a loss term51, we minimize
the difference between the probability distribution of the latent space created by the encoder and the standard
Gaussian distribution N(0, I). This helps in constructing a seamless and continuous latent space from which new
samples can be generated using standard Gaussian distribution and allows us to discover and design novel vitrimers
not present in the training set. The KLD is calculated as
DKL
 N
 µ1, ..., µd
⊺, diag
 σ2
1, ..., σ2
d
⊺
∥N (0, I)

= 1
2
d
X
j=1
[µ2
j + σ2
j −log(σ2
j ) −1].
(7)
Subsequently, we use Dprop to jointly train encoder, decoder and property predictor at the same time, i.e.,
θa, θe, ϕa, ϕe, ω ←
arg min
θa,θe,ϕa,ϕe,ω
Nprop
X
i=1

CE

p(i)
M
′, p(i)
M

+ CE

p(i)
A
′, p(i)
A

+ CE

p(i)
(u,v)
′, p(i)
(u,v)

+ BCE

p(i)
b
′, p(i)
b

|
{z
}
reconstruction loss
+ λKL
1
Nprop
Nprop
X
i=1
DKL

N
h
µ(i)
1 , ..., µ(i)
d
i⊺
, diag
h
σ(i)
1
2, ..., σ(i)
d
2i⊺
∥N (0, I)

|
{z
}
Kullback–Leibler divergence
+
1
Nprop
Nprop
X
i=1

T (i)
g
′ −T (i)
g
2
|
{z
}
property prediction loss
.
(8)
The additional property prediction loss ensures accurate prediction of Tg from latent vectors. This joint training
process reorganizes the latent space and places vitrimers with similar Tg in close proximity to each other. More
details about hierarchical encoder and decoder, network architecture, training protocols and hyperparameters are
presented in Supplementary Notes 3.1 and 3.2.
Performance of the VAE
We first evaluate the ability of the VAE to reconstruct a given vitrimer. We encode the vitrimers in the test set into
mean vectors of latent distribution µ then decode µ back to vitrimers. The ratio of successfully reconstructed (i.e.,
both carboxylic acid and epoxide decoded from µ are identical to input molecules) is 85.4%, which demonstrates
well-trained encoders and decoders capable of accommodating and reconstructing vitrimers unseen by the VAE.
Examples of ten vitrimers from the test set and the corresponding reconstructions are presented in Supplementary
Figure 6. Eight vitrimers are perfectly reconstructed, while one component of vitrimers is decoded into different but
similar molecules in the two unsuccessful examples.
We then assess the performance of the VAE to generate vitrimers. We sample 1,000 latent vectors z from standard
Gaussian distribution and decode them into the carboxylic acid and epoxide molecules constituting vitrimers. 85.2%
of the sampled vitrimers are valid, i.e., the composing acid and epoxide molecules are chemically valid and contain
exactly two carboxylic acid and epoxide groups. Even though the decoders are not explicitly coded to only output
carboxylic acids and epoxides (e.g., by making the decoders build up molecules based on two carboxylic acid and
epoxide functional groups), most of the randomly sampled latent vectors are decoded to molecules containing the
desired functionality. Examples of sampled vitrimers are shown in Supplementary Figure 7. Components of the
three invalid sampled vitrimers are also carboxylic acids and epoxides but do not have exactly two functional groups.
Apart from validity, we are also interested in novelty and uniqueness of the generated vitrimers, which are defined
as the ratio of sampled vitrimers which are not present in the training set and the expected fraction of unique
vitrimers per sampled vitrimers, respectively. Results show that all of the 1,000 vitrimers sampled from the latent
space are novel and unique, which greatly benefits the discovery of vitrimers by exploring the latent space.
7/16

We further examine the effect of joint training with the small dataset Dprop containing a limited number of
labeled vitrimers. All four metrics of the model before and after joint training are presented in Supplementary Table
3. The improved reconstruction accuracy and sample validity show that the second-step joint training enhances the
performance of the model and that the encoders and decoders are not biased to the limited data in Dprop.
The property predictor maps latent space encoded from vitrimers to Tg and serves as a surrogate model for
estimating Tg without the need for costly MD simulations. We evaluate the predictive power of the property
predictor network by encoding the vitrimers in the test set into mean vectors µ and predicting the associated Tg.
The predicted Tg and true Tg are compared in Supplementary Figure 8. A mean absolute error of 13.53 K indicates
accurate prediction of Tg by the property predictor which facilitates the inverse design process.
The VAE jointly trained with the property predictor organizes the latent space such that vitrimers exhibiting
similar properties are positioned in the vicinity of each other. We examine the distribution of latent vectors and
corresponding Tg of the labeled datasets using principal component analysis (PCA). As shown in Supplementary
Figure 9a and 9b, the distribution of the latent vectors shows an obvious gradient in both training and test sets,
where vitrimers with higher Tg cluster in the lower left region. Such a well-structured latent space based on properties
benefits discovery of novel vitrimers with desired Tg. For comparison, the latent vector distribution before joint
training is presented in Supplementary Figure 9c and 9d. The much less obvious trend confirms the effect of joint
training on latent space organization.
Interpretable exploration of the latent space
The well trained, continuous latent space enables us to discover new vitrimers by exploring the latent space through
modifications of latent vectors z. For example, we start with the latent vector z0 of a known vitrimer (adipic
acid and bisphenol A diglycidyl ether) as origin and sample latent vectors in the neighborhood by perturbing z0.
Previous works that employ multi-component VAEs (i.e., VAEs with multiple encoders and decoders) simply add
embedding or mean (log variance) vectors from encoders to derive the unified latent vector z32. The effect of
different components is not considered individually and a change in z leads to potential changes in all components.
The partially overlapping latent dimensions (Equation 2) allow us to explore the vicinity of the origin z0 along
different axes by adding noise to acid-specific latent dimensions (first da dimensions of z0), epoxide-specific latent
dimensions (last de dimensions of z0) and all latent dimensions of z0 (details are provided in Supplementary Note
3.4). Consequently, novel vitrimers with changes in only acid, only epoxide and both components are identified by
decoding the latent vectors modified along three axes, as shown in Figures 4a-c. The decoded vitrimers present
variety in molecular structures without significant changes in Tg (Figure 4f) due to limited search region in latent
space, which opens an opportunity to tailor a specific vitrimer to its novel variants with different molecular structures
but preserve certain property similarity.
Besides neighborhood search, we perform an interpolation between two points in the latent space and identify
a series of new vitrimers along the path. Figure 4d presents an example of spherical interpolation (SLERP)55
between vitrimers with highest and lowest Tg in the training set. As opposed to linear interpolation (LERP), we
use SLERP because Gaussian distribution in high dimensions closely follows the surface of a hypersphere. The
decoded vitrimers show a smooth transition from the low-Tg vitrimer with linear structure to the high-Tg vitrimer
with more aromatic nature. The continuous transition between molecular structures and Tg (Figure 4f) evidences
the smoothness of the latent space with associated Tg. The vitrimers discovered by LERP and their associated Tg
are shown in Supplementary Figure 10. More details on spherical and linear interpolation schemes are presented in
Supplementary Note 3.4.
Inverse design by Bayesian optimization
The VAE together with the property predictor succeeds in learning the hidden relationships between latent space
and Tg of vitrimers, which allows us to tailor vitrimer compositions to desirable Tg even beyond the training regime.
Although we have achieved forward projection from the vitrimer space (or latent space) to property space, the
inverse mapping is more challenging due to the fact that multiple distinct vitrimers could have a similar Tg. To
achieve inverse design of vitrimers with optimal or desirable Tg, we employ batch Bayesian optimization to identify
the latent vectors z that have the potential to be decoded into vitrimers with target Tg. The proposed candidates
are further validated by MD simulations with GP calibration, and the optimal solutions with desirable Tg are found.
Due to the discrete nature of molecules, the latent vectors proposed by the optimization process may lead to invalid
molecules. Furthermore, since the discrete molecules are projected onto a continuous latent space by the VAE, it is
inevitable that multiple distinct latent vectors in the neighborhood can be decoded into the same vitrimer but are
associated with different Tg predicted by the property predictor. This severely limits the accuracy and efficiency of
the optimization process. To this end, we add an additional decoding-encoding step before passing z to the property
8/16

Origin
Acid-specific
Origin
Epoxide-specific
Origin
All
Start
SLERP
End
a
b
c
d
e
f
Start
End
Origin
Start
End
Origin
Figure 4. Exploration in the latent space to discover novel vitrimers. (a)(b)(c) Starting with a known
vitrimer as origin (adipic acid and bisphenol A diglycidyl ether), vitrimers are discovered by perturbing its latent
vector in (a) acid-specific dimensions, (b) epoxide-specific dimensions and (c) all dimensions. (d) Novel vitrimers
are identified along the interpolation path between two vitrimers in the training set. (e) The distribution of
discovered vitrimers is visualized in the latent space by PCA. (f) Tg of discovered vitrimers. All presented Tg values
of are validated by MD simulations and GP calibration.
9/16

Tg = 530 K
Tg = 569 K
Tg = 564 K
Tg = 542 K
Tg = 373 K
Tg = 373 K
Tg = 373 K
Tg = 373 K
Tg = 248 K
Tg = 250 K
Tg = 247 K
Tg = 247 K
a
b
c
Figure 5. Inverse design of novel vitrimers by Bayesian optimization based on three targets of
desirable Tg: (a) Maximum Tg, (b) Tg = 373 K and (c) Tg = 248 K. All presented Tg values of proposed
vitrimers are validated by MD simulations and GP calibration.
10/16

predictor to predict Tg (Supplementary Figure 11). More specifically, when evaluating the Tg of a point of interest z
in the latent space during the optimization process, z is first decoded into a carboxylic acid and an epoxide. If both
molecules are valid, they are passed to the encoders to obtain the reconstructed mean vector µrecon, which is further
passed to the property predictor to evaluate the Tg. In this way, the Bayesian optimization algorithm is able to
search for potential candidates with desirable Tg efficiently without proposing the same vitrimer for a large number
of iterations. More details about Bayesian optimization are provided in Supplementary Note 3.5.
To demonstrate the effectiveness of our inverse design framework, we use Bayesian optimization to discover novel
vitrimers with three different targets: maximum Tg, Tg = 373 K and Tg = 248 K. Tg of the proposed candidates is
validated by MD simulations and GP calibration. For each target, four examples of discovered vitrimers are presented
in Figure 5. For the first target (maximum Tg), our VAE model generates novel vitrimers with MD-validated Tg
beyond the upper bound of Tg in the training data (500 K) and thereby expands the limits in thermal properties of
bifunctional transesterification vitrimers. The Bayesian optimization procedures are able to probe the latent space
outside of the training domain and propose novel vitrimers with extreme properties, which is difficult for traditional
forward modeling methods to find. For the second target, the Bayesian optimization algorithm effectively searches
the latent space and successfully proposes vitrimers with the exact target Tg of 373 K. The corresponding latent
vectors are spread out in the latent space and the vitrimer compositions present significant molecular variety. For the
third target which is the lower bound of the training domain (248 K), the proposed vitrimers (especially carboxylic
acids) are more similar to each other and occupy a small region in the latent space. This can be attributed to the
fact that there are not many linear molecules with more aliphatic nature in the 50,000 acids or epoxides making the
training set. As a result, the distribution of these vitrimers with low Tg is insufficiently captured by the VAE and
the proposed candidates of low-Tg vitrimers are restrained by the limited training data.
The Tg distributions of the dataset and around 100 designed vitrimers for each target are presented in Supple-
mentary Figure 12. For the target of maximum Tg, our model efficiently discovers novel vitrimer chemistries beyond
the training property space. For the other two targets of 373 K and 248 K, the distributions are centered around the
design target. Ten examples of novel vitrimers discovered by Bayesian optimization for each target are presented in
Supplementary Figure 13. For the first target, all ten proposed vitrimers have validated Tg larger than 500 K, which
indicates the effective extrapolation beyond the training domain by our framework. For the other two targets of
finding vitrimers with exact target Tg, the discovered vitrimers present Tg within a range of 2 K around the target
and maintain considerable molecular diversity, proving the high accuracy in the inverse design process. We further
examine the stability of the proposed molecules by minimizing them by reactive molecular dynamics (ReaxFF)
using the CHON2017_weak_bb force field9. All molecules remain stable during minimization and the minimized
structures are presented in Supplementary Figure 14.
We carry out further analysis based on the molecular descriptors of ten proposed vitrimers for each target. The
molecular descriptors except density are calculated from the vitrimer repeating units (Supplementary Figure 1a with
n = 1) by the Modred package56. Density of each vitrimer at 300 K is extracted from MD simulations. The relevant
descriptors of designed low, medium and high temperature vitrimers are presented in Supplementary Figure 15. The
vitrimers with higher Tg have larger molecular weight, higher density, more heavy atoms and multiple bonds and
fewer rotatable bonds. Consequently, the chains in these vitrimers are more rigid and less mobile, which agrees with
the common knowledge of structure-Tg relationships in polymers.
We compare Tg of the designed vitrimers with nine commonly used polymers in Supplementary Figure 16. The
proposed vitrimers cover a wide range of Tg suitable for various applications from coating materials to aerospace
polymers. With further tuning of the target, our framework has the potential to discover vitrimer compositions
with any Tg within an expanded range and expedite the widespread applications of sustainable polymers in various
industries.
Experimental synthesis of novel vitrimer designed with chemical intuition
To experimentally validate the effectiveness of the VAE model, we perform Bayesian optimization to propose novel
vitrimers with a target Tg of 323 K. Since epoxides are typically more difficult to synthesize, the epoxide molecule is
fixed as bisphenol A diglycidyl ether (DGEBA) during optimization to improve synthesizability of the vitrimer. In
other words, the shared and epoxide-specific dimensions are fixed while we only optimize acid-specific dimensions in
Equation 2. Out of the carboxylic acids proposed by the VAE model, four acids with low SA scores (2.39 to 2.61) and
symmetric structures are further analyzed for synthesis feasibility. Additionally, some of these acid molecules have
an amine group that can react with epoxide rings to form irreversible covalent bonds, thereby reducing the adaptive
nature of the macromolecular network. Keeping these thermodynamical stability issues in polymer synthesis and
resulting crosslinked network through chemical intuition, we make slight modifications to the proposed structures to
achieve a symmetric acid molecule with a lower SA score (2.23) that can be synthesized using off-the-shelf chemicals.
11/16

a
Cut
Pristine
Healed
d
c
Tg = 317 K
Tg = 311 K
Tv = 489 K
Proposed acids
DGEBA (fixed)
Chemical intuition
Thermodynamically
favorable vitrimer
b
SA = 2.39
SA = 2.61
SA = 2.40
SA = 2.53
SA = 2.23
Figure 6. Synthesis and characterization of novel vitrimer designed by ML framework. (a) Four
vitrimers (epoxide fixed as DGEBA) are proposed by Bayesian optimization with a target Tg = 323 K. Driven by
chemical intuition, a symmetric and thermodynamically stable vitrimer are selected. (b) Reaction scheme for
synthesis of the acid and consequent crosslinking with DGEBA to form a novel vitrimer. (c) Experimental
characterization of the synthesized vitrimer to measure Tg and Tv. The measured Tg ranges from 311 K to 317 K,
which agrees well with the design target. (d) Images of pristine, cut and healed vitrimer specimens, confirming
healability of the synthesized vitrimer.
12/16

This acid is crosslinked with DGEBA epoxide to form a stable polymer, demonstrating inverse design and synthesis
of novel vitrimer chemsitry (Figure 6a).
The synthesis of the novel vitrimer chemistry is carried out by the ring opening reaction of succinic anhydride by
glycerol followed by immediate crosslinking with DGEBA. The reaction of beta-hydroxy groups of glycerol with
succinic anhydride opens the ring and creates carboxylic functional groups. The resultant acid is crosslinked with
DGEBA in presence of catalyst triazabicyclodecene (TBD) to yield the final vitrimer product (Figure 6b). The
cured vitrimer is verified using Fourier transform infrared (FTIR) spectroscopy, as shown in Supplementary Figure
17. The characteristic peaks for carbonyl groups at 1728 cm−1 and for aromatic epoxide chains at 1033 to 1028 cm−1
are observed. In addition, other peaks at 1400 to 1608 cm−1 indicate the formation of ester linkages between acids
and epoxides. We further characterize the thermal properties of the synthesized vitrimer using differential scanning
calorimetry (DSC) and thermomechanical analysis (TMA), as shown in Figure 6c. DSC result shows one transition
temperature (Tg) at 317 K, indicating complete curing of crosslinked vitrimer. TMA result presents two thermal
transitions, first at 311 K for Tg and second at 489 K for Tv. The difference in Tg from DSC and TMA arises due to
different physical phenomena and sensitivities measured by each technique. DSC measures heat flow associated with
the glass transition, which reflects changes in heat capacity as the polymer transitions from a glassy to a rubbery
state, it therefore provides an average Tg. TMA on the other hand measures the mechanical response of the polymer
to non-isothermal creep and the machine detects subtle changes in molecular mobility through dimensional changes.
Experimental Tg from DSC and TMA agrees well with the design target (323 K) and demonstrates the capability of
our framework to design novel vitrimers with desired experimental Tg. The second transition indicates flowability of
the vitrimer at elevated temperature when dynamic exchange reactions start to occur and enhance polymer chain
mobility. To confirm healability of the vitrimer, we cut a pristine specimen and heal it at temperature around Tv.
The surfaces of pristine, cut, and healed samples are examined under the microscope (Figure 6d). The complete
removal of damage shows healability and recyclability of the synthesized novel vitrimer chemistry.
Conclusion
We develop an integrated MD-ML framework for inverse design of bifunctional transesterification vitrimers with
desirable Tg. A diverse vitrimer dataset is built for the first time from the ZINC15 database39. High-throughput
MD simulations with a GP calibration model are employed to calculate Tg on a subset of vitrimers. The dataset
is used to train a VAE model with dual graph encoders and decoders which enables representation and design of
the desired vitrimer components. This further provides flexibility by exploring the latent space and optimizing
latent vectors of different components for novel vitrimers. We demonstrate the high accuracy and efficiency of our
framework in discovering novel vitrimers with three different targets of Tg even beyond the training distribution. The
proposed vitrimers achieve both molecular variety and desirable Tg within 2 K range around the target, which make
them ideal candidates for sustainable polymers for different applications. To validate our framework in experiments,
we synthesize and characterize a novel vitrimer designed by the model. This vitrimer is proposed by optimizing
acid-specific dimensions of latent vector while fixing epoxide as DGEBA. Driven by chemical intuition, we then
slightly modify the proposed acids to a thermodynamically favorable derivative. The experimentally measured Tg
(311 to 317 K) agrees well with the design target (323 K), which validates effectiveness of the VAE model. With slight
adjustment to the VAE architecture and established computational methods to generate property data, the proposed
framework can be extended to a wide range of properties (for example, Young’s modulus, thermal conductivity,
and topology freezing temperature) and other types of polymers. The complete workflow of computational design
and experimental validation opens an opportunity for polymer scientists to achieve high-fidelity inverse design of
multi-component polymeric materials with desirable properties.
Methods
Details of MD simulations (Section 1), GP calibration model (Section 2), hierarchical representation of molecules
(Section 3.1), VAE architecture and training protocols (Section 3.2), VAE performance (Section 3.3), exploration of
the latent space (Section 3.4), Bayesian optimization (Section 3.5), estimate of computational efficiency (Section 4)
and experiments (Section 5) are provided in Supplementary Information.
Data and code availability
The code and data used for the GP calibration model and code used for the VAE framework and Bayesian
optimization have been uploaded to GitHub (https://github.com/yiwenzheng98/VitrimerVAE). The
13/16

generated vitrimer data (molecules in SMILES, density-temperature profiles and calculated Tg) will be made openly
available at the time of publication.
Acknowledgements
Y. Zheng and A. Vashisth would like to thank Microsoft Climate Research Initiative and University of Washington,
Seattle for funding. The research design, GPU for machine learning, and molecular simulations used in this study
were partially provided by the HYAK supercomputer system of University of Washington. P. Thakolkaran and S.
Kumar acknowledge the research funding by the Dutch Research Council (NWO): OCENW.XS22.2.103.
Authors contributions
Y.Z.: Methodology, Software, Validation, Data Curation, Visualization, Writing, Reviewing and Editing; P.T.:
Methodology, Software, Visualization, Reviewing and Editing; A.K.B.: Methodology, Experiment, Reviewing and
Editing; J.A.S.: Conceptualization, Methodology, Software, Reviewing and Editing; Z.L.: Software, Reviewing
and Editing; S.Z.: Reviewing and Editing; B.H.N.: Conceptualization, Reviewing and Editing, Supervision; S.K.:
Conceptualization, Methodology, Reviewing and Editing, Supervision; A.V.: Conceptualization, Methodology,
Reviewing and Editing, Supervision.
Competing interests
J.A.S., Z.L., S.Z. and B.H.N. are employees of Microsoft Corporation. Y.Z., P.T., A.K.B., S.K. and A.V.
declare no competing interests.
References
1. Young, R. J. & Lovell, P. A. Introduction to polymers (CRC press, 2011).
2. Krishnakumar, B. et al. Vitrimers: Associative dynamic covalent adaptive networks in thermoset polymers.
Chem. Eng. J. 385, 123820 (2020).
3. Montarnal, D., Capelot, M., Tournilhac, F. & Leibler, L. Silica-like malleable materials from permanent organic
networks. Science 334, 965–968 (2011).
4. Jin, Y., Lei, Z., Taynton, P., Huang, S. & Zhang, W. Malleable and recyclable thermosets: the next generation
of plastics. Matter 1, 1456–1493 (2019).
5. Valavala, P. & Odegard, G.
Modeling techniques for determination of mechanical properties of polymer
nanocomposites. Rev. on Adv. Mater. Sci. 9, 34–44 (2005).
6. Vashisth, A., Ashraf, C., Bakis, C. E. & van Duin, A. C. Effect of chemical structure on thermo-mechanical
properties of epoxy polymers: Comparison of accelerated reaxff simulations and experiments. Polymer 158,
354–363 (2018).
7. Hoogenboom, R., Meier, M. A. & Schubert, U. S. Combinatorial methods, automated synthesis and high-
throughput screening in polymer research: past and present. Macromol. rapid communications 24, 15–32
(2003).
8. Hansson, T., Oostenbrink, C. & van Gunsteren, W. Molecular dynamics simulations. Curr. opinion structural
biology 12, 190–196 (2002).
9. Vashisth, A., Ashraf, C., Zhang, W., Bakis, C. E. & Van Duin, A. C. Accelerated reaxff simulations for
describing the reactive cross-linking of polymers. The J. Phys. Chem. A 122, 6633–6642 (2018).
10. Yu, K.-q., Li, Z.-s. & Sun, J. Polymer structures and glass transition: A molecular dynamics simulation study.
Macromol. theory simulations 10, 624–633 (2001).
11. Kamble, M. et al. Reversing fatigue in carbon-fiber reinforced vitrimer composites. Carbon 187, 108–114 (2022).
12. Kranenburg, J. M., Tweedie, C. A., van Vliet, K. J. & Schubert, U. S. Challenges and progress in high-throughput
screening of polymer mechanical properties by indentation. Adv. Mater. 21, 3551–3561 (2009).
13. Guo, K., Yang, Z., Yu, C.-H. & Buehler, M. J. Artificial intelligence and machine learning in design of mechanical
materials. Mater. Horizons 8, 1153–1172 (2021).
14/16

14. Barnett, J. W. et al. Designing exceptional gas-separation polymer membranes using machine learning. Sci.
advances 6, eaaz4301 (2020).
15. Jørgensen, P. B. et al. Machine learning-based screening of complex molecules for polymer solar cells. The J.
chemical physics 148 (2018).
16. Tao, L., Chen, G. & Li, Y. Machine learning discovery of high-temperature polymers. Patterns 2 (2021).
17. Tao, L., Varshney, V. & Li, Y. Benchmarking machine learning models for polymer informatics: an example of
glass transition temperature. J. Chem. Inf. Model. 61, 5395–5413 (2021).
18. Yang, J., Tao, L., He, J., McCutcheon, J. R. & Li, Y. Machine learning enables interpretable discovery of
innovative polymers for gas separation membranes. Sci. Adv. 8, eabn9545 (2022).
19. Kadurin, A., Nikolenko, S., Khrabrov, K., Aliper, A. & Zhavoronkov, A. drugan: an advanced generative
adversarial autoencoder model for de novo generation of new molecules with desired molecular properties in
silico. Mol. pharmaceutics 14, 3098–3104 (2017).
20. Sanchez-Lengeling, B., Outeiral, C., Guimaraes, G. L. & Aspuru-Guzik, A. Optimizing distributions over
molecular space. an objective-reinforced generative adversarial network for inverse-design chemistry (organic).
ChemRxiv (2017).
21. Prykhodko, O. et al. A de novo molecular generation method using latent vector based generative adversarial
network. J. Cheminformatics 11, 1–13 (2019).
22. Gómez-Bombarelli, R. et al. Automatic chemical design using a data-driven continuous representation of
molecules. ACS central science 4, 268–276 (2018).
23. Jin, W., Barzilay, R. & Jaakkola, T. Junction tree variational autoencoder for molecular graph generation. In
International conference on machine learning, 2323–2332 (PMLR, 2018).
24. Jin, W., Barzilay, R. & Jaakkola, T. Hierarchical generation of molecular graphs using structural motifs. In
International conference on machine learning, 4839–4848 (PMLR, 2020).
25. Batra, R. et al. Polymers for extreme conditions designed using syntax-directed variational autoencoders. Chem.
Mater. 32, 10489–10500 (2020).
26. Jiang, S., Dieng, A. B. & Webb, M. A. Property-guided generation of complex polymer topologies using
variational autoencoders. npj Comput. Mater. 10, 139 (2024).
27. Xu, M. et al. Geodiff: A geometric diffusion model for molecular conformation generation. arXiv preprint
arXiv:2203.02923 (2022).
28. Hoogeboom, E., Satorras, V. G., Vignac, C. & Welling, M. Equivariant diffusion for molecule generation in 3d.
In International conference on machine learning, 8867–8887 (PMLR, 2022).
29. Jablonka, K. M., Schwaller, P., Ortega-Guerrero, A. & Smit, B. Leveraging large language models for predictive
chemistry. Nat. Mach. Intell. 6, 161–169 (2024).
30. Wu, S. et al. Machine-learning-assisted discovery of polymers with high thermal conductivity using a molecular
design algorithm. Npj Comput. Mater. 5, 66 (2019).
31. Zhu, M.-X., Song, H.-G., Yu, Q.-C., Chen, J.-M. & Zhang, H.-Y. Machine-learning-driven discovery of polymers
molecular structures with high thermal conductivity. Int. J. Heat Mass Transf. 162, 120381 (2020).
32. Yao, Z. et al. Inverse design of nanoporous crystalline reticular materials with deep generative models. Nat.
Mach. Intell. 3, 76–86 (2021).
33. Weininger, D. Smiles, a chemical language and information system. 1. introduction to methodology and encoding
rules. J. chemical information computer sciences 28, 31–36 (1988).
34. Krenn, M., Häse, F., Nigam, A., Friederich, P. & Aspuru-Guzik, A. Self-referencing embedded strings (selfies):
A 100% robust molecular string representation. Mach. Learn. Sci. Technol. 1, 045024 (2020).
35. Rogers, D. & Hahn, M. Extended-connectivity fingerprints. J. chemical information modeling 50, 742–754
(2010).
36. Kearnes, S., McCloskey, K., Berndl, M., Pande, V. & Riley, P. Molecular graph convolutions: moving beyond
fingerprints. J. computer-aided molecular design 30, 595–608 (2016).
15/16

37. Lerique, S., Abitbol, J. L. & Karsai, M. Joint embedding of structure and features via graph convolutional
networks. Appl. Netw. Sci. 5, 1–24 (2020).
38. Zheng, L., Karapiperis, K., Kumar, S. & Kochmann, D. M. Unifying the design space and optimizing linear and
nonlinear truss metamaterials by generative modeling. Nat. Commun. 14, 7563 (2023).
39. Sterling, T. & Irwin, J. J. Zinc 15–ligand discovery for everyone. J. chemical information modeling 55, 2324–2337
(2015).
40. Pence, H. E. & Williams, A. Chemspider: an online chemical information resource (2010).
41. Kim, S. et al. Pubchem 2023 update. Nucleic acids research 51, D1373–D1380 (2023).
42. Van Zee, N. J. & Nicolaÿ, R. Vitrimers: Permanently crosslinked polymers with dynamic network topology.
Prog. Polym. Sci. 104, 101233 (2020).
43. Ertl, P. & Schuffenhauer, A. Estimation of synthetic accessibility score of drug-like molecules based on molecular
complexity and fragment contributions. J. cheminformatics 1, 1–11 (2009).
44. Afzal, M. A. F. et al. High-throughput molecular dynamics simulations and validation of thermophysical
properties of polymers for various applications. ACS Appl. Polym. Mater. 3, 620–630 (2020).
45. Deringer, V. L. et al. Gaussian process regression for materials and molecules. Chem. Rev. 121, 10073–10141
(2021).
46. Bicerano, J. Prediction of polymer properties (cRc Press, 2002).
47. Chemical retrieval on the web (crow). http://www.polymerdatabase.com/.
48. Ran, Y., Zheng, L.-J. & Zeng, J.-B. Dynamic crosslinking: An efficient approach to fabricate epoxy vitrimer.
Materials 14, 919 (2021).
49. Wu, J. et al. Natural glycyrrhizic acid: improving stress relaxation rate and glass transition temperature
simultaneously in epoxy vitrimers. Green Chem. 23, 5647–5655 (2021).
50. Ediger, M. D., Angell, C. A. & Nagel, S. R. Supercooled liquids and glasses. The journal physical chemistry
100, 13200–13212 (1996).
51. Kingma, D. P. & Welling, M. Auto-encoding variational bayes. arXiv preprint arXiv:1312.6114 (2013).
52. Tishby, N., Pereira, F. C. & Bialek, W. The information bottleneck method. arXiv preprint physics/0004057
(2000).
53. Good, I. J. Rational decisions. J. Royal Stat. Soc. Ser. B (Methodological) 14, 107–114 (1952).
54. Kullback, S. & Leibler, R. A. On information and sufficiency. The annals mathematical statistics 22, 79–86
(1951).
55. Shoemake, K. Animating rotation with quaternion curves. In Proceedings of the 12th annual conference on
Computer graphics and interactive techniques, 245–254 (1985).
56. Moriwaki, H., Tian, Y.-S., Kawashita, N. & Takagi, T.
Mordred: a molecular descriptor calculator.
J.
cheminformatics 10, 1–14 (2018).
16/16

AI-guided inverse design and discovery of recyclable
vitrimeric polymers
Supplementary Information
Yiwen Zheng1, Prakash Thakolkaran2, Agni K. Biswal1, Jake A. Smith3,4, Ziheng Lu3,
Shuxin Zheng3, Bichlien H. Nguyen3,4*, Siddhant Kumar2*, and Aniruddh Vashisth1*
1Department of Mechanical Engineering, University of Washington, Seattle, WA, USA
2Department of Materials Science and Engineering, Delft University of Technology, Delft, The Netherlands
3Microsoft Research AI4Science
4Paul G. Allen School of Computer Science and Engineering, University of Washington, Seattle, WA, USA
*bnguy@microsoft.com, sid.kumar@tudelft.nl, vashisth@uw.edu
1 Molecular dynamics simulations
We perform MD simulations on 8,424 vitrimers sampled from the large dataset of one million to calculate their
Tg. The simulations are conducted by Large-scale Atomic/Molecular Massively Parallel Simulator (LAMMPS)1
and Polymer Consistent Force Field (PCFF)2 to describe the potential energy of atoms. PCFF has been applied
to simulate the behavior of various polymeric systems including vitrimers3,4. We build the polymer chains in an
alternating copolymer manner. For each vitrimer composition (i.e., one carboxylic acid molecule and one epoxide
molecule), we connect the acid molecule and opened epoxide molecule alternately to form one vitrimer chain of
around one thousand atoms. The reaction scheme is shown in Supplementary Figure 1a. Four of these chains
are placed in a cubic simulation box with a density of 0.5 g/cm3 (Supplementary Figure 1b). The connection
and placement of atoms in the simulation box are done by Enhanced Monte Carlo package5, which creates input
structures for MD simulations using the Monte Carlo method with energetically favored orientations.
The initial configuration is minimized using the conjugate gradient method and annealed to remove local
heterogeneities. Specifically, the minimized structure is first relaxed under NVT ensemble (300 K) for 50 ps and
under NPT ensemble (300 K and 1 atm) for 100 ps. We further heat the virtual specimen from 300 K to 800 K
under NPT (1 atm) in 500 ps. The dimension of the simulation box is reduced and the density is taken to a realistic
level after annealing. Two snapshots of the virtual specimens of an example vitrimer (adipic acid and bisphenol
A diglycidyl ether) before and after annealing are presented in Supplementary Figure 1b. We hold the annealed
system at 800 K for an additional 50 ps to obtain five independent specimens separated by 10 ps, which is proved to
be sufficient to eliminate the effect of initial structures and ensure better statistics6. For production period, each of
these specimens is cooled from 800 K to 100 K in a 10 K step. Each cooling step takes 25 ps under NPT followed by
a 25-ps holding at constant temperature, during which the density is calculated as the average from 25 frames. We
fit a bilinear regression to the density-temperature profile from 800 K to 100 K and the intersection point is defined
as the T MD
g
(Figure 2a in the manuscript). All T MD
g
results from five virtual specimens are averaged to reduce the
uncertainty due to the stochastic nature of MD simulations. The distributions of mean MD-calculated T MD
g
and
coefficient of variation (i.e., mean divided by standard deviation) from five replicates of 8,424 vitrimers are presented
in Supplementary Figure 2.
2 Gaussian process model for calibration of Tg
To compensate for the overestimation in T MD
g
due to the larger cooling rate compared with experiments, a calibration
procedure is required. Afzal et al.7 calibrate T MD
g
against experimental Tg by linear regression. However, we
find it insufficient due to the effect of increased uncertainty associated with smaller systems in our simulations
(Supplementary Figure 3c). Instead, we calibrate T MD
g
from MD simulations against available experimental data in
literature using a Gaussian process (GP) regression model. 2048-bit extended-connectivity fingerprints (ECFPs)8
with radius 3 are used as input to the GP model to represent the repeating units of polymers. For vitrimers (i.e.,
combinations of carboxylic acids and epoxides), we obtain the repeating units by the reaction scheme depicted in
Supplementary Figure 1a with n = 1. For the GP model, we employ the Tanimoto kernel9,10, which relies on the
1
arXiv:2312.03690v4  [cond-mat.mtrl-sci]  6 Sep 2024

packing x4
 
  
 
 
  
  
 
 
 
  
  
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
a
b
C
O
H
4.5 nm
3.7 nm
annealing
minimization
Supplementary Figure 1. Molecular dynamics simulations to calculate Tg of vitrimers. (a) A virtual
vitrimer chain is made by connecting carboxylic acids and opened epoxides in an alternating manner. (b) Four
chains of ∼1,000 atoms are placed in a simulation box. The system is annealed to remove local heterogeneities
before production.
a
b
Supplementary Figure 2. Distributions of (a) mean Tg and (b) coefficient of variation in Tg from five replicate
MD simulations of 8,424 vitrimers.
Tanimoto similarity measure extensively used in cheminformatics. Unlike the traditional kernels (e.g., the radial
basis function kernel used by Jinich et al.11) which are more suitable for continuous spaces (Supplementary Figure
3b), Tanimoto kernel allows for swift and accurate comparison between molecular fingerprints as bit vectors. The
Tanimoto kernel in the GP model is defined as follows:
k(x, x′) =
σ⟨x, x′⟩
∥x∥2 + ∥x′∥2 −⟨x, x′⟩,
(1)
where x, x′ are fingerprints of two molecules, σ is the variance of the kernel, ⟨x, x′⟩is the inner product and ∥x∥2 is
the square of norm. Calibrated and experimental Tg from leave-one-out cross validation (LOOCV) with different
calibration methods are compared in Supplementary Figure 3 and GP calibration with Tanimoto kernel achieves the
best accuracy with a mean absolute error of 28.07 K. We proceed to calibrate T MD
g
of all 8,424 vitrimers by the
trained GP model. Ten vitrimers with highest and lowest calibrated Tg are presented in Supplementary Figure 4.
2/16

a
b
c
Supplementary Figure 3. Calibrated Tg vs. experimental Tg by (a) GP with Tanimoto kernel, (b) GP
with RBF kernel and (c) linear regression.
a
b
Tg = 501 K
Tg = 497 K
Tg = 496 K
Tg = 494 K
Tg = 488 K
Tg = 486 K
Tg = 485 K
Tg = 484 K
Tg = 483 K
Tg = 483 K
Tg = 248 K
Tg = 253 K
Tg = 261 K
Tg = 262 K
Tg = 266 K
Tg = 268 K
Tg = 272 K
Tg = 274 K
Tg = 274 K
Tg = 274 K
Highest Tg in the dataset
Lowest Tg in the dataset
Supplementary Figure 4. Ten example vitrimers with highest and lowest Tg in the dataset.
3/16

Atom level
Motif level
Attachment level
Encode
Decode
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Supplementary Figure 5. Schematic illustration of the three-level hierarchical graph representation.
The shared atoms between motifs are highlighted in grey blocks on the attachment level.
3 Machine learning framework
3.1 Hierarchical representation of molecules
We follow the hierarchical representation of molecules proposed by Jin et al.12. A molecule G = (V, E) is preprocessed
by decomposing it into n motifs (subgraphs) M1, ..., Mn using the following procedures. First, we identify all bonds
between atom pair u and v with more than two connections and either u or v belongs to a ring. We then break all
these bonds and convert G into a series of detached graphs. For each detached graph, if it appears more than a
threshold frequency f during decomposition of all molecules in the training set, it is selected as a motif. Otherwise it
is further decomposed into single rings and bonds (i.e., one bond with two atoms) which are selected as motifs. In this
way, chemical validity is preserved and the union of all motifs covers the entire graph. We preprocess all molecules in
the training set by the same procedures and a motif vocabulary VM is obtained. We empirically find that the VAE
model works better when the motifs are constrained to single rings and bonds, i.e., f →∞. This can be attributed
to the fact that all molecules in the dataset are relatively small and limited to a maximum molecular weight of 500
g/mol. Larger motifs with more than one bonds can be used to accommodate larger molecules if necessary. Two
vocabularies with sizes of 124 and 104 motifs are constructed for acid and epoxide molecules, respectively.
We further represent G as a combination of hierarchical graphs at three levels (see Supplementary Figure 5 for
a schematic illustration of the three-level hierarchical representation). The motif level GM captures how motifs
M1, ..., Mn are connected, i.e., GM = (VM, EM) with motifs as nodes and bonds connecting motifs as edges.
In addition, the attachment level GA represents connection between motifs through shared atoms. Each node
Ai = (Mi, {vj}) at this level defines a connection site of Mi with {vj} as all possible atoms shared by Si and its
neighbors. Since the possible connection sites of Mi are finite, a vocabulary of attachment nodes VA(Mi) that
depends on each motif Mi is constructed. Finally, the atom level G encodes the graph at the atomic level. Each node
4/16

is an atom and each edge is a bond of the molecule. This representation scheme captures necessary information of
molecules at three levels with different resolutions and ensures chemical validity. As a result, the associative encoder
and decoder can achieve accurate reconstruction and efficient generation of valid vitrimers in the VAE framework.
3.2 VAE architecture and training protocols
We adopt the hierarchical encoder and decoder associated with the hierarchical graph representation12. We use
PyTorch13 to implement and train the model, and RDKit14 for cheminformatics operations.
3.2.1 Encoder
The hierarchical encoder encodes a molecule G (which can be either acid or epoxide; superscripts omitted for
simplicity) from the finer level to the coarser level. The encoder contains three message passing networks (MPNs) as
detailed by Jin et al.12. At the atom level, each node is an atom v and each edge is a bond euv between atoms u and
v. The node features consist of atomic charge and atom type and the edge feature is bond type. All atom and bond
types are represented as one-hot encodings. The node and edge features are first converted into embedding vectors
before passing to the MPN:
{hv} = MPN (G, {E(v)}, {E(euv)}) ,
(2)
where {hv} is the atom-level encoding for each atom v and E(·) denotes embedding vector of (·). At the attachment
level, the node feature is a concatenation of its embedding E(Ai) and the sum of all atom-level encodings of its
constituent atoms:
f Ai = MLP
 
E(Ai) ⊕
X
v∈Mi
hv
!
.
(3)
The edge feature between attachment nodes Ai and Aj is an embedding of a parameter xij denoting their parent-child
relation based on depth-first search:
xij =
(
0,
if Aj is the parent;
k,
if Ai is the k-th child of Aj.
(4)
The attachment-level encodings are calculated as
{hAi} = MPN
 GA, {f Ai}, {E(xij)}

.
(5)
The encoding at the motif level is similar to attachment level with nodes as motifs Mi, i.e.,
f Mi = MLP (E(Mi) ⊕hAi) .
(6)
and
{hMi} = MPN
 GM, {f Mi}, {E(xij)}

.
(7)
Two linear neural networks are used to output mean vector µ and log variance vector log σ2 from the encoding of
the root motif hM1. The root motif is the first motif to be generated during decoding.
3.2.2 Decoder
The decoder attempts to iteratively build the hierarchical graph based on latent vector z of the original molecule.
Here for simplicity we refer to z as the concatenation of acid-specific dimensions (or epoxide-specific dimensions)
with shared dimensions (see Equation 2 in the manuscript). At t-th step of generation, we denote Mk as the motif
whose neighbor will be generated in the next step. Motifs are generated in a depth-first order. We use the same
hierarchical MPN architecture to encode all the motifs and atoms in the partially generated graph and obtain motif
encodings hMk and atom encodings hv for each existing motif and atom. At the motif level, the next motif Mt to
be connected to Mk is predicted based on the entire motif vocabulary VM:
pMt = softmax (MLP (hMk ⊕z)) .
(8)
At the attachment level, we predict which attachment At of motif Mt is used, which is classified over the attachment
vocabulary VA(Mt):
pAt = softmax (MLP (hMk ⊕z)) .
(9)
5/16

Hyperparameters
Encoder Qϕ
Decoder Pθ
Property predictor Fω
Input dimensions
none
da = de = 112
d = 128
Embedding dimensions
250
250
none
Hidden dimensions
250
250
64
Output dimensions
da = de = 112
none
1
Supplementary Table 1. Hyperparameters of the network architecture.
Hyperparameters
Step one
Step two
λKL
0.005
0.005
Batch size
32
32
Optimizer
Adam15
Adam15
Learning rate
constant 0.001
0.001 × 0.9i−1 at epoch i
Number of epochs
10
50
Supplementary Table 2. Hyperparameters of the training protocols.
At the atom level, the detailed atomic attachment configuration (u, v) is decided, where u and v are atoms from Ak
and At, respectively. The probability of a certain attachment configuration (u, v)t is calculated as
p(u,v)t = softmax (MLP (hu ⊕hv) · z) .
(10)
An additional MLP is used to predict the probability of backtracing, i.e., there are no new neighbors to be generated
for Mk:
pbt = softmax (MLP (hMk ⊕z)) .
(11)
3.2.3 Training
The one million vitrimer dataset is divided into two subsets: 999,000 vitrimers without Tg as unlabeled training
set D = {(Ga(i), Ge(i)) : i = 1, ..., 999000} and 1,000 vitrimers with Tg as test set Dtest = {(Ga(i), Ge(i), T (i)
g ) :
i = 1, ..., 1000}. We randomly sample a subset of 8,424 vitrimers from the whole dataset and calculate their
Tg by MD simulations and GP calibration. A subset of 7,424 vitrimers is denoted as the labeled training set
Dprop = {(Ga(i), Ge(i), T (i)
g ) : i = 1, ..., 7424} and the rest 1,000 vitrimers constitute the test set Dtest. D and Dprop
are used to train the VAE on a two-step basis (see Equation 6 and Equation 8 in the manuscript) and Dtest allows
for evaluation of the reconstruction and property prediction capabilities on unseen data. The network dimensions
and hyperparameters of the VAE framework are presented in Supplementary Tables 1 and 2, respectively. Note that
we do not differentiate between the acid and epoxide encoders (decoders) because the network architectures are
identical.
3.3 VAE performance
The metrics of the VAE model before and after joint training with the small dataset Dprop are presented in
Supplementary Table 3. The improved metrics show that the model is not biased to Dprop and is able to accommodate
and generate a wide range of vitrimers. Examples of ten vitrimers from the test set and their reconstructions are
shown in Supplementary Figure 6. Two out of ten vitrimers are not successfully reconstructed due to mismatch of
one of the components. Supplementary Figure 7 presents examples of 20 vitrimers sampled from the latent space
based on standard Gaussian distribution. The three invalid vitrimers have chemically valid acids or epoxides which
are not bifunctional. The predicted Tg by the property predictor is compared with calibrated Tg for 1,000 vitrimers
in the test set, as shown in Supplementary Figure 8. A low MAE of 13.53 K indicates high accuracy of the trained
property predictor. The distributions of latent vectors encoded from the labeled training set Dprop and test set
Dtest after joint training are shown in Supplementary Figure 9a,b. Compare with the distributions before joint
training (Supplementary Figure 9c,d), the gradient in Tg is much more recognizable, proving the effect of latent
space organization by joint training the VAE with property predictor.
6/16

Metrics
Before joint training
After joint training
Reconstruction accuracy
81.8%
85.4%
Sample validity
82.8%
85.2%
Sample novelty
100.0%
100.0%
Sample uniqueness
100.0%
100.0%
Supplementary Table 3. Metrics of the VAE before and after joint training.
Input
Reconstructed
Input
Reconstructed
Supplementary Figure 6. Examples of input and reconstructed vitrimers from the test set. Unsuccessful
reconstructions are highlighted in red boxes.
3.4 Exploration of latent space
Starting with the latent vector of a know vitrimer z0 as origin, we can find novel vitrimers by adding noise, i.e.,
z = z0 + β · ϵ,
(12)
where β determines the magnitude of the noise and ϵ ∼N(0, I). The partial overlapping method enables us to
explore the neighborhood along three axes: acid-specific (first da dimensions of ϵ are non-zero), epoxide-specific (last
de dimensions of ϵ are non-zero) and both (all dimensions of ϵ are non-zero).
We define a spherical interpolation (SLERP) path between two latent representations z1 and z2:
SLERP(z1, z2; α) = sin((1 −α)θ)
sin θ
z1 + sin(αθ)
sin θ z2,
(13)
where α ∈[0, 1] is the interpolation parameter and θ is the angle between z1 and z2. This is different from the linear
7/16

Sampled vitrimers from VAE
Supplementary Figure 7. Examples of vitrimers sampled from the latent space according to standard
Gaussian distribution. Invalid vitrimer components are highlighted in red boxes.
Supplementary Figure 8. Predicted Tg by the property predictor vs. true Tg.
interpolation (LERP) that has been used in previous works16,17:
LERP(z1, z2; α) = (1 −α)z1 + αz2.
(14)
We choose SLERP over LERP since LERP operates on the presumption of a linear connection between points which
disregards the inherent structure of the multi-dimensional Gaussian distribution. Moreover, LERP calculates the
8/16

a
b
c
d
Supplementary Figure 9. Distributions of latent vectors of (a) training set after joint training, (b) test
set after joint training, (c) training set before joint training and (d) test set before joint training.
Latent vectors of higher dimensions are projected into two principal axes for visualization using principal component
analysis (PCA).
Start
LERP
End
b
c
d
Start
End
Start
End
Start
SLERP
End
a
Supplementary Figure 10. Comparison between spherical interpolation (SLERP) and linear
interpolation (LERP). (a)(b) Vitrimers discovered by (a) SLERP and (b) LERP in the latent space. (c)
Interpolation paths in latent space visualized by PCA. (d) Tg of discovered vitrimers. All presented Tg values of are
validated by MD simulations and GP calibration.
Euclidean distance between two points which may not be consistent with the similarity between vitrimers in the
9/16

latent space. Therefore, points along the linear interpolation path might leap across regions within the latent space
that share similar molecular structures which results in irregular or unnatural interpolations. On the other hand,
SLERP acknowledges the hyperspherical structure of the latent space and pursues the shortest arc on the surface of
a d-dimensional hypersphere, thereby minimizing unrealistic transitions along the path. Supplementary Figure 10
shows the decoded vitrimers along SLERP and LERP paths, their locations in the latent space and Tg. Previous
studies18,19 have addressed the effectiveness of SLERP, which is more suitable for traversing between two locations
in the latent space created by VAEs.
3.5 Bayesian optimization
We use the batch Bayesian optimization algorithm developed by Kusner et al.20.
The workflow of Bayesian
optimization is illustrated in Supplementary Figure 11. We start with 1,000 latent vectors z randomly sampled
from standard Gaussian distribution and decode them into valid vitrimers. These vitrimers are then encoded into
reconstructed latent vectors and their Tg is predicted by the property predictor. The predicted Tg is converted into
the optimization objective, which is either −Tg (if the task is to find vitrimers with the maximum Tg) or the squared
error between Tg and the target Tg (if the task is to find vitrimers with a target Tg). In each iteration, a sparse
Gaussian process with 100 inducing points is trained as a surrogate model and 50 vitrimers are proposed by the
expected improvement acquisition function. The valid vitrimers and their predicted Tg are added to the training set
for next iteration. Ten independent runs each with 50 iterations are performed and all valid proposed vitrimers are
collected. For each of the three design targets, we select 100 candidates with predicted Tg closest to the target that
can be parameterized by PCFF, carry out MD simulations and calibrate MD-calculated T MD
g
. The distributions of
Tg of the designed vitrimers and the dataset are presented in Supplementary Figure 12. Ten best candidates with Tg
closet to each target are presented in Supplementary Figure 13. Our framework succeeds in extrapolating beyond
the training regime and achieves accurate inverse design within an error of 2 K.
To examine the stability of vitrimers presented in Supplementary Figure 13, we minimize them under reactive
force field (ReaxFF). ReaxFF is a molecular dynamics simulation technique that captures the instantaneous
interactions between atoms using the bond order concept21. This strategy allows for a smooth transition between
the non-bonded and bonded configurations and helps with the investigation of chemical reactions where bond
formation and dissociation are involved. The proposed molecules remain intact during minimization using the
CHON2017_weak_bb force field22 and the minimized structures are presented in Supplementary Figure 14. We
further calculate relevant molecular descriptors of these vitrimers, as shown in Supplementary Figure 15. Density
is extracted from MD simulations at 300 K. All other descriptors are calculated by the Mordred package23. Each
value is calculated from the repeating units (Supplementary Figure 1a with n = 1) and averaged over ten proposed
vitrimers.
We compare the Tg of the proposed vitrimers with commonly used polymers in Supplementary Figure 16. The
vitrimers from inverse design cover a wide range of Tg from around 250 K to 550 K. With further tuning of the design
target, our framework has the potential to discover vitrimers with any Tg within the range and greatly enhances the
applicability of vitrimers at various temperatures.
Initial/updated
latent vectors 𝒛
Decoder
Valid vitrimers
 
 
 
  
 
  
 
 
  
  
Reconstructed
latent vectors 𝒛
Encoder
Property 
predictor
Tg
Minimize –Tg or
(Tg – target)2
Surrogate model
Acquisition function
Next
iteration
Target
Start
Supplementary Figure 11. Schematic workflow of Bayesian optimization.
10/16

Vitrimers proposed by VAE and Bayesian optimization
Supplementary Figure 12. Distributions of Tg of the dataset and the vitrimers proposed by the VAE
and Bayesian optimization. All presented Tg values of are validated by MD simulations and GP calibration.
Tasks
Software
Hardware
Runtime (h)
Tg calculation of one vitrimer by MD
LAMMPS
CPU
310
Training of the VAE with D
PyTorch
GPU
130
Joint training of the VAE and property predictor Fω with Dprop
PyTorch
GPU
5
Tg prediction of 1,000 vitrimers by trained Fω
PyTorch
GPU
0.01
Proposing ∼1,300 candidate vitrimers by Bayesian optimization
PyTorch
GPU
1
Supplementary Table 4. The computational runtime, used software and hardware for different tasks in
this work. The presented runtime is roughly estimated with one core of a 2.1 GHz Intel Xeon Gold 6230 CPU and
a NVIDIA GeForce RTX 2080 Ti GPU.
4 Computational efficiency
The computational runtime, used software and hardware for different tasks are listed in Supplementary Table 4 to
demonstrate the efficiency of the proposed method in this work. The trained property predictor serves as a shortcut
for costly MD simulations to estimate Tg of vitrimers, which also allows for efficient discovery of novel vitrimers
with target Tg by Bayesian optimization.
5 Experimental synthesis and characterization
The synthesis of the proposed vitrimer (Figure 6 in the manuscript) is performed by a two-step reaction. The first
step involves mixing of succinic anhydride (1 mol) with glycerol (0.5 mol) at 130°C for 1 hour to obtain a clear
solution mixture of polymer with bifunctional carboxylic acid groups. In the second step, equivalent stoichiometric
amount of DGEBA is added to the mixture in presence of catalyst triazabicyclodecene (TBD), which is further
mixed at the same condition for 30 minutes to obtain a homogeneous slurry. The slurry is then transferred into
a preheated Teflon taped mold at 145°C and covered with top cover. The mold is placed into the heat press to
continue the crosslinking at 145°C for 6 hours followed by post curing for 2 hours at 180°C.
The crosslinked vitrimer specimen is verified using Fourier-transform infrared (FTIR) spectroscopy, as shown
in Supplementary Figure 17. Differential scanning calorimetry (DSC) is carried out by TA Instruments Q2000.
11/16

a
b
Tg = 569 K
Tg = 564 K
Tg = 545 K
Tg = 542 K
Tg = 530 K
Tg = 520 K
Tg = 516 K
Tg = 514 K
Tg = 511 K
Tg = 509 K
Tg = 373 K
Tg = 373 K
Tg = 373 K
Tg = 373 K
Tg = 373 K
Tg = 373 K
Tg = 372 K
Tg = 372 K
Tg = 374 K
Tg = 372 K
Target: maximum Tg
Target: Tg = 373 K
c
Target: Tg = 248 K
Tg = 248 K
Tg = 247 K
Tg = 247 K
Tg = 247 K
Tg = 249 K
Tg = 246 K
Tg = 250 K
Tg = 246 K
Tg = 246 K
Tg = 250 K
Supplementary Figure 13. Examples of novel vitrimers designed with different target Tg from Bayesian
optimization. (a) Maximum Tg. (b) Target Tg = 373 K. (c) Target Tg = 248 K. All presented Tg values of
proposed vitrimers are validated by MD simulations and GP calibration.
12/16

a
b
Target: maximum Tg
Target: Tg = 373 K
c
Target: Tg = 248 K
C
O
H
N
Supplementary Figure 14. Minimized structures of vitrimer components presented in Supplementary
Figure 13. The molecules are minimized by ReaxFF using the CHON2017_weak_bb force field.
Thermomechanical analysis (TMA) is performed at 0.1N applied force with a heating rate of 5°C per minute using
Perkin Elmer TMA7.
13/16

a
b
c
d
Supplementary Figure 15. Relevant molecular descriptors of the vitrimers presented in Supplementary
Figure 13. (a) Molecular weight. (b) Atom fractions. (c) Density at 300 K. (d) Bond fractions. All values are
averages of ten vitrimers per target.
Supplementary Figure 16. Tg of commonly used polymers and our proposed vitrimers by inverse
design.
14/16

Supplementary Figure 17. Fourier-transform infrared (FTIR) spectroscopy of the synthesized vitrimer.
15/16

References
1. Thompson, A. P. et al. Lammps-a flexible simulation tool for particle-based materials modeling at the atomic,
meso, and continuum scales. Comput. Phys. Commun. 271, 108171 (2022).
2. Sun, H., Mumby, S. J., Maple, J. R. & Hagler, A. T. An ab initio cff93 all-atom force field for polycarbonates.
J. Am. Chem. society 116, 2978–2987 (1994).
3. Sun, Y., Yang, H., Yu, K., Guo, Y. & Qu, J. A molecular dynamics study of decomposition of covalent adaptable
networks in organic solvent. Polymer 180, 121702 (2019).
4. Park, C. et al. Enhanced self-healing performance of graphene oxide/vitrimer nanocomposites: A molecular
dynamics simulations study. Polymer 206, 122862 (2020).
5. in’t Veld, P. J. & Rutledge, G. C. Temperature-dependent elasticity of a semicrystalline interphase composed of
freely rotating chains. Macromolecules 36, 7358–7365 (2003).
6. Alzate-Vargas, L. et al. Uncertainties in the predictions of thermo-physical properties of thermoplastic polymers
via molecular dynamics. Model. Simul. Mater. Sci. Eng. 26, 065007 (2018).
7. Afzal, M. A. F. et al. High-throughput molecular dynamics simulations and validation of thermophysical
properties of polymers for various applications. ACS Appl. Polym. Mater. 3, 620–630 (2020).
8. Rogers, D. & Hahn, M. Extended-connectivity fingerprints. J. chemical information modeling 50, 742–754
(2010).
9. Ralaivola, L., Swamidass, S. J., Saigo, H. & Baldi, P. Graph kernels for chemical informatics. Neural networks
18, 1093–1110 (2005).
10. Thawani, A. R. et al. The photoswitch dataset: a molecular machine learning benchmark for the advancement
of synthetic chemistry. ChemRxiv (2020).
11. Jinich, A., Sanchez-Lengeling, B., Ren, H., Harman, R. & Aspuru-Guzik, A. A mixed quantum chemistry/machine
learning approach for the fast and accurate prediction of biochemical redox potentials and its large-scale
application to 315 000 redox reactions. ACS central science 5, 1199–1210 (2019).
12. Jin, W., Barzilay, R. & Jaakkola, T. Hierarchical generation of molecular graphs using structural motifs. In
International conference on machine learning, 4839–4848 (PMLR, 2020).
13. Paszke, A. et al. Pytorch: An imperative style, high-performance deep learning library. Adv. neural information
processing systems 32 (2019).
14. Landrum, G. et al. Rdkit: Open-source cheminformatics. https://www.rdkit.org.
15. Kingma, D. P. & Ba, J. Adam: A method for stochastic optimization. arXiv preprint arXiv:1412.6980 (2014).
16. Batra, R. et al. Polymers for extreme conditions designed using syntax-directed variational autoencoders. Chem.
Mater. 32, 10489–10500 (2020).
17. Yao, Z. et al. Inverse design of nanoporous crystalline reticular materials with deep generative models. Nat.
Mach. Intell. 3, 76–86 (2021).
18. Gómez-Bombarelli, R. et al. Automatic chemical design using a data-driven continuous representation of
molecules. ACS central science 4, 268–276 (2018).
19. White, T. Sampling generative networks. arXiv preprint arXiv:1609.04468 (2016).
20. Kusner, M. J., Paige, B. & Hernández-Lobato, J. M. Grammar variational autoencoder. In International
conference on machine learning, 1945–1954 (PMLR, 2017).
21. Van Duin, A. C., Dasgupta, S., Lorant, F. & Goddard, W. A. Reaxff: a reactive force field for hydrocarbons.
The J. Phys. Chem. A 105, 9396–9409 (2001).
22. Vashisth, A., Ashraf, C., Zhang, W., Bakis, C. E. & Van Duin, A. C. Accelerated reaxff simulations for
describing the reactive cross-linking of polymers. The J. Phys. Chem. A 122, 6633–6642 (2018).
23. Moriwaki, H., Tian, Y.-S., Kawashita, N. & Takagi, T.
Mordred: a molecular descriptor calculator.
J.
cheminformatics 10, 1–14 (2018).
16/16
