Integrating Scientific Knowledge with Machine Learning
for Engineering and Environmental Systems
JARED WILLARD*, University of Minnesota
XIAOWEI JIA*, University of Pittsburgh
SHAOMING XU, University of Minnesota
MICHAEL STEINBACH, University of Minnesota
VIPIN KUMAR, University of Minnesota
There is a growing consensus that solutions to complex science and engineering problems require novel
methodologies that are able to integrate traditional physics-based modeling approaches with state-of-the-art
machine learning (ML) techniques. This paper provides a structured overview of such techniques. Application-
centric objective areas for which these approaches have been applied are summarized, and then classes of
methodologies used to construct physics-guided ML models and hybrid physics-ML frameworks are described.
We then provide a taxonomy of these existing techniques, which uncovers knowledge gaps and potential
crossovers of methods between disciplines that can serve as ideas for future research.
CCS Concepts: • General and reference →Surveys and overviews; • Computing methodologies →Ma-
chine learning.
Additional Key Words and Phrases: physics-guided, neural networks, deep learning, physics-informed, theory-
guided, hybrid, knowledge integration
ACM Reference Format:
Jared Willard, Xiaowei Jia, Shaoming Xu, Michael Steinbach, and Vipin Kumar. 2020. Integrating Scientific
Knowledge with Machine Learning for Engineering and Environmental Systems. 1, 1 (March 2020), 35 pages.
https://doi.org/10.1145/1122445.1122456
1
INTRODUCTION
Machine learning (ML) models, which have already found tremendous success in commercial
applications, are beginning to play an important role in advancing scientific discovery in environ-
mental and engineering domains traditionally dominated by mechanistic (e.g. first principle) models
[30, 124, 128, 141, 142, 157, 232, 283]. The use of ML models is particularly promising in scientific
problems involving processes that are not completely understood, or where it is computationally
infeasible to run mechanistic models at desired resolutions in space and time. However, the ap-
plication of even the state-of-the-art black box ML models has often met with limited success in
This work was supported by NSF grant #1934721 and by DARPA award W911NF-18-1-0027.
*Both authors contributed equally to this research.
Authors’ addresses: Jared Willard, willa099@umn.edu, University of Minnesota, Minneapolis, Minnesota, 55455; Xiaowei Jia,
xiaowei@pitt.edu, University of Pittsburgh, Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania, 15260; Shaoming Xu, xu000114@umn.edu, University
of Minnesota, Minneapolis, Minnesota, 55455; Michael Steinbach, stei0062@umn.edu, University of Minnesota, Minneapolis,
Minnesota, 55455; Vipin Kumar, kumar001@umn.edu, University of Minnesota, Minneapolis, Minnesota, 55455.
Permission to make digital or hard copies of all or part of this work for personal or classroom use is granted without fee
provided that copies are not made or distributed for profit or commercial advantage and that copies bear this notice and the full
citation on the first page. Copyrights for components of this work owned by others than ACM must be honored. Abstracting
with credit is permitted. To copy otherwise, or republish, to post on servers or to redistribute to lists, requires prior specific
permission and/or a fee. Request permissions from permissions@acm.org.
© 2020 Association for Computing Machinery.
XXXX-XXXX/2020/3-ART $15.00
https://doi.org/10.1145/1122445.1122456
, Vol. 1, No. 1, Article . Publication date: March 2020.
arXiv:2003.04919v6  [physics.comp-ph]  14 Mar 2022

2
Jared Willard, Xiaowei Jia, Shaoming Xu, Michael Steinbach, and Vipin Kumar
scientific domains due to their large data requirements, inability to produce physically consistent
results, and their lack of generalizability to out-of-sample scenarios [47, 166, 190]. Given that neither
an ML-only nor a scientific knowledge-only approach can be considered sufficient for complex sci-
entific and engineering applications, the research community is beginning to explore the continuum
between mechanistic and ML models, where both scientific knowledge and ML are integrated in
a synergistic manner [139, 141, 143]. This paradigm is fundamentally different from mainstream
practices in the ML community for making use of domain-specific knowledge in feature engineering
or post-processing, as it is focused on approaches that integrate scientific knowledge directly into the
ML framework.
Even though the idea of integrating scientific principles and ML models has picked up momentum
just in the last few years, there is already a vast amount of work on this topic. For instance, in
all Web of Science databases (www.webofknowledge.com) a search for "physics-informed ML"
alone shows the growth of publications from 2 in 2017, 8 in 2018, 27 in 2019, to 63 in 2020. Also,
many workshops and symposiums have formed to focus on this field (e.g. [1–6, 21]). This work
is being pursued in diverse disciplines (e.g., earth systems [232], climate science [87, 153, 207],
turbulence modeling [37, 199, 295], computational physics [261], cyberphysical systems [223],
material discovery [49, 222, 243], quantum chemistry [240, 245], biological sciences [8, 215, 306],
and hydrology [275, 297]), and it is being performed in the context of diverse objectives specific to
these applications. Early results in isolated and relatively simple scenarios are promising, and the
expectations are rising for this paradigm to accelerate scientific discovery and help address some
of the biggest challenges that are facing humanity in terms of climate [87], health [280], and food
security [129].
The goal of this survey is to bring these exciting developments to the ML community, to make them
aware of the progress that has been made, and the gaps and opportunities that exist for advancing
research in this promising direction. We hope that this survey will also be valuable for scientists
who are interested in exploring the use of ML to enhance modeling in their respective disciplines.
Please note that work on this topic has been referred to by other names, such as "physics-guided
ML," "physics-informed ML," or "physics-aware AI" although it covers many scientific disciplines.
In this survey, we also use the terms "physics-guided" or "physics," which should be more generally
interpreted as "scientific knowledge-guided" or "scientific knowledge".
The focus of this survey is on approaches that integrate scientific knowledge with ML for envir-
onmental and engineering systems where scientific knowledge is available as mechanistic models,
theories, and laws (e.g. conservation of mass). This distinguishes our survey from other works that
focus on more general knowledge integration into machine learning [7, 277] and works covering
physics integration into ML in specific domains (e.g., cyber-physical systems [223], chemistry [205],
medical imaging [175], fluid mechanics [46], climate and weather[146]). This survey creates a novel
taxonomy that covers a wide array of physics-ML methodologies, application-centric objectives, and
general computational objectives.
We organize the paper as follows. Section 2 describes different application-centric objectives
that are being pursued through combinations of scientific knowledge and ML. Section 3 discusses
novel ML loss functions, model initializations, architectures, and hybrid models that researchers are
developing to achieve these objectives, as well as comparisons between them. Section 4 discusses
the areas of current work as well as the possibilities for cross-fertilization between methods and
application-centric objectives. Then, Section 5 contains concluding remarks. Table 3 categorizes the
work surveyed in this paper by application-centric objective and methods for integrating scientific
knowledge in ML according to the proposed taxonomy.
, Vol. 1, No. 1, Article . Publication date: March 2020.

Physics-Guided Machine Learning Survey
3
Fig. 1. A generic scientific problem in engineering, where ®𝑥𝑡are the dynamic inputs in time, ®𝑠is the set
of static characteristics or parameters of the system, and 𝐹() is the model producing target variable ®𝑦𝑡.
®𝑥𝑡and ®𝑦𝑡can also have spatial dimensions.
2
APPLICATION-CENTRIC OBJECTIVES OF PHYSICS-ML INTEGRATION
This section provides a brief overview of a set of application-centric objectives where couplings
of ML and scientific modeling paradigms are being pursued for applications in environmental and
engineering systems. In many of these applications, scientific knowledge is represented using a
mechanistic model (also referred to as physical, process-based, or first principles models). This is
shown in Figure 1 as part of an abstract representation of a generic scientific problem. For example,
a model for lake temperature would have drivers ®𝑥𝑡, such as amount of sunlight, air temperature,
and wind speed, with static parameters ®𝑠, such as lake depth and water clarity, which the model
𝐹(®𝑥𝑡, ®𝑠) would use to predict the water temperature ®𝑦𝑡at various depths in the lake. Such physical
models typically have a notion of state (which is not depicted in Figure 1 for simplicity), and complex
physical models can have multiple components that model various aspects of the system, e.g.,
components to model clouds or ocean in a global climate model. The application-centric objectives
described in this section describe different ways in which physics-ML integration can be used to
address the imperfections of the mechanistic model 𝐹(), build a more resource efficient 𝐹(), or
discover new knowledge such as 𝐹(). Below we describe how different application-centric objectives
fit into each of these scenarios.
First, situations can arise in which a mechanistic model is inadequate to model a poorly understood
process and a data-driven model could be leveraged to make better use of observations and possibly
also process-based knowledge. Section 2.1 covers approaches like this, where physics-ML is being
pursued to improve the effectiveness and predictive accuracy of 𝐹(®𝑥𝑡, ®𝑠) with observations and
scientific knowledge.
Often it is also desirable to improve the resource efficiency where physical models are too
slow or at too coarse of a resolution. Section 2.2 on downscaling considers how physics-ML
can produce high-resolution output variables faster than a physical model in situations spanning
meteorology, climatology, and others. Similarly, if subprocesses of a larger mechanistic model are
computationally intractable or inaccurate, an ML model can be used for faster or more accurate
subprocess representation, as is covered in Section 2.3 on parameterization. More generally, the
concept of reducing computational complexity of complex mechanistic or numerical models in the
form of an ML-based or ML-assisted reduced order model is described in Section 2.4. Another
objective seeking to improve resource efficiency with physics-ML is the solving of partial differential
equations (PDEs) where the solution is represented with a data-driven model. This allows dynamical
systems applications to bypass the often extreme computational complexity of using finite elements
methods to solve complex systems of PDEs. As we can see, in many of these cases ML can be used
as a more efficient surrogate model (also referred to as emulators) for an existing mechanistic or
numerical approach.
, Vol. 1, No. 1, Article . Publication date: March 2020.

4
Jared Willard, Xiaowei Jia, Shaoming Xu, Michael Steinbach, and Vipin Kumar
Objective Name
Objective Description
Needs
2.1 Improving Over
Physical Model
Improved version of 𝐹that better
matches observations
Observations (synthetic samples
can be used but not required)
2.2 Downscaling
An approximate version of 𝐹
that provides high resolution output 𝑌𝑡
given coarse resolution input 𝑋𝑡
Synthetic samples at high resolution
(can also make use of observations at high
resolutions but this can be hard to obtain)
2.3 Parameterization
Replace a component of 𝐹when 𝐹consists
of interconnected component models
Synthetic samples (e.g. subprocess)
2.4 Reduced-
Order Models
Simpler version of 𝐹that is
more computationally efficient
and possibly less accurate
Governing equations (e.g. high-fidelity,
complex models)
2.5 Forward Solving
PDEs
Computationally efficient single
pass solution of PDE
Governing equations (e.g. high-fidelity,
complex models)
2.6 Inverse Modeling
Discover static characteristics 𝑆given
®𝑥𝑡and ®𝑦𝑡
Observations (synthetic samples
can be used but not required)
2.7 Discovering
Governing Equations
Find governing equations that underlie 𝐹
Observations
2.8 Data Generation
Generate realistic synthetic samples
without using 𝐹
Synthetic data (or observations)
2.9 Uncertainty
Quantification
Estimate uncertainty on ®𝑦𝑡given input ®𝑥𝑡
Observations or synthetic samples
Table 1. Application-centric objectives of using Physics-ML methods in terms of the generic scientific
problem shown in Figure 1 and the needs to pursue each objective
Other objectives seek to discover new knowledge in the form of unobserved causal quantities or
the symbolic representation of a process given only data. Compared to previous objectives where
the goal is to produce accurate or efficient output variables, inverse modeling described in Section
2.6 flips the path shown in Figure 1 and instead seeks to find some causal static physical parameters
within ®𝑠given sufficient outputs. Also, Section 2.7 covers the discovering of governing equations
from data, where ML has been used to go beyond traditional approaches and discover new explicit
symbolic representations of phenomena.
Data generation objectives (Section 2.8) try to realistically reproduce the distribution of ®𝑥𝑡, ®𝑦𝑡, or
(®𝑥𝑡, ®𝑦𝑡). Such synthetically generated data can be useful in the often data-limited situations present in
engineering and environmental systems. UQ (Section 2.9) tries to learn the distribution of ®𝑦𝑡in terms
of the uncertainty of the other components of the model like the inputs, static parameters, and model
state. UQ is necessary for accurate forecasting, which can also affect many of the other objectives.
Table 1 summarizes these objectives and their needs in terms of real world observations, synthetic
samples (e.g. output from a mechanistic model), or knowledge of the governing equations of the
system.
, Vol. 1, No. 1, Article . Publication date: March 2020.

Physics-Guided Machine Learning Survey
5
2.1
Improving over state-of-the-art physical models
First-principle models are used extensively in a wide range of engineering and environmental
applications. Even though these models are based on known physical laws, in most cases, they
are necessarily approximations of reality due to incomplete knowledge of certain processes, which
introduces bias. In addition, they often contain a large number of parameters whose values must be
estimated with the help of limited observed data, degrading their performance further, especially due
to heterogeneity in the underlying processes in both space and time. The limitations of physics-based
models cut across discipline boundaries and are well known in the scientific community (e.g., see
Gupta et al. [116] in the context of hydrology).
ML models have been shown to outperform physics-based models in many disciplines (e.g.,
materials science [148, 238, 285], applied physics [22, 127], aquatic sciences [132, 286], atmospheric
science [206], biomedical science [264], computational biology [9]). A major reason for this success
is that ML models (e.g., neural networks), given enough data, can find structure and patterns in
problems where complexity prohibits the explicit programming of a system’s exact physical nature.
Given this ability to automatically extract complex relationships from data, ML models appear
promising for scientific problems with physical processes that are not fully understood but have data
of adequate quality and quantity is available. However, the black-box application of ML has met with
limited success in scientific domains due to a number of reasons [141]: (i) while state-of-the-art ML
models are capable of capturing complex spatiotemporal relationships, they require far too much
labeled data for training, which is rarely available in real application settings, (ii) ML models often
produce scientifically inconsistent results; and (iii) ML models can only capture relationships in
the available training data, and thus cannot generalize to out-of-sample scenarios (i.e., those not
represented in the training data).
The key objective here is to combine elements of physics-based modeling with state-of-the-art
ML models to leverage their complementary strengths. Such integrated physics-ML models are
expected to better capture the dynamics of scientific systems and advance the understanding of
underlying physical processes. An early attempt for combining ML with physics-based modeling
in lake temperature dynamics [231]) has already demonstrated its potential for providing better
prediction accuracy with a much smaller number of samples as well as generalizability in out-of-
sample scenarios.
2.2
Downscaling
Complex mechanistic models are capable of capturing physical reality more precisely than simpler
models, as they often involve more diverse components that account for a greater number of processes
at finer spatial or temporal resolution. However, given the computation cost and modeling complexity,
many models are run at a resolution that is coarser than what is required to precisely capture
underlying physical processes. For example, cloud-resolving models (CRM) need to run at sub-
kilometer horizontal resolution to be able to effectively represent boundary-layer eddies and low
clouds, which are crucial for the modeling of Earth’s energy balance and the cloud–radiation
feedback [230]. However, it is not feasible to run global climate models at such fine resolutions even
with the most powerful computers expected to be available in the near future.
Downscaling techniques have been widely used as a solution to capture physical variables that
need to be modeled at a finer resolution. In general, the downscaling techniques can be divided into
two categories: statistical downscaling and dynamical downscaling. Statistical downscaling refers to
the use of empirical models to predict finer-resolution variables from coarser-resolution variables.
Such a mapping across different resolutions can involve complex non-linear relationships that cannot
be precisely modeled by traditional empirical models. Recently, artificial neural networks have shown
, Vol. 1, No. 1, Article . Publication date: March 2020.

6
Jared Willard, Xiaowei Jia, Shaoming Xu, Michael Steinbach, and Vipin Kumar
a lot of promise for this problem, given their ability to model non-linear relationships [249, 273]. In
contrast, dynamical downscaling makes use of high-resolution regional simulations to dynamically
simulate relevant physical processes at regional or local scales of interest. Due to the substantial time
cost of running such complex models, there is an increasing interest in using ML models as surrogate
models (a model approximating simulation-driven input–output data) to predict target variables at a
higher resolution [103, 254].
Although the state-of-the-art ML methods can be used in both statistical and dynamical downscal-
ing, it remains a challenge to ensure that the learned ML component is consistent with established
physical laws and can improve the overall simulation performance.
2.3
Parameterization
Complex physics-based models (e.g., for simulating phenomena in climate, weather, turbulence
modeling, hydrology) often use an approach known as parameterization to account for missing
physics. In parameterization (note that this term has a different meaning when used in mathematics
and geometry), specific complex dynamical processes are replaced by simplified physical approx-
imations that are represented as static parameters. A common way to estimate the value of these
parameters is to use grid search over the space of combinations of parameter values that lead to the
best match with observations. This procedure is referred to as parameter calibration. The failure to
correctly parameterize can make the model less robust, and errors that result from imperfect para-
meterization can also feed into other components of the entire physics-based model and deteriorate
the modeling of important physical processes. Another way, that is being considered increasingly, is
to replace processes that are too complex to be physically represented in the model by a simplified
dynamic or statistical/ML process. This makes it possible to learn new parameterizations directly
from observations and/or high-resolution model simulation using ML methods. Already, ML-based
parameterizations have shown success in geology [52, 109], atmospheric science [40, 103], and
hydrology [29]. A major benefit of ML-based parameterizations is the reduction of computation
time compared to traditional physics-based simulations. In chemistry, Hansen et al. [120] find that
parameterizations of atomic energy using ML take seconds compared to multiple days for more
standard quantum-calculation calculations, and Behler et al. [27] find that neural networks can vastly
improve the efficiency of finding potential energy surfaces of molecules.
Most of the existing work uses standard black box ML models for parameterization, but there is
an increasing interest in integrating physics in the ML models [32], as it has the potential to make
them more robust and generalizable to unseen scenarios as well as reduce the number of training
samples needed for training.
2.4
Reduced-Order Models
Reduced-Order Models (ROMs) are computationally inexpensive representations of more complex
models. Usually, constructing ROMs involves dimensionality reduction that attempts to capture
the most important dynamical characteristics of often large, high-fidelity simulations and models
of physical systems (e.g., in fluid dynamics [164]). This can also be viewed as a controlled loss
of accuracy. A common way to do this is to project the governing equations of a system onto a
linear subspace of the original state space using a method such as principal components analysis
or dynamic mode decomposition [221]. However, limiting the dynamics to a lower-dimensional
subspace inherently limits the accuracy of any ROM.
ML is beginning to assist in constructing ROMs for increased accuracy and reduced computational
cost in several ways. One approach is to build an ML-based surrogate model for full-order models
[56, 147], where the ML model can be considered a ROM. Other ways include building an ML-based
surrogate model of an already built ROM by another dimensionality reduction method [295] or
, Vol. 1, No. 1, Article . Publication date: March 2020.

Physics-Guided Machine Learning Survey
7
building an ML model to mimic the dimensionality reduction mapping from a full-order model to a
reduced-order model [199]. ML and ROMs can also be combined by using the ML model to learn
the residual between a ROM and observational data [278]. ML models have the potential to greatly
augment the capabilities of ROMs because of their typically quick forward execution speed and
ability to leverage data to model high dimensional phenomena.
One area of recent focus of ML-based ROMs is in approximating the dominant modes of the
Koopman (or composition) operator, as a method of dimensionality reduction. The Koopman operator
is an infinite-dimension linear operator that encodes the temporal evolution of the system state
through nonlinear dynamics [42]. This allows linear analysis methods to be applied to nonlinear
systems and enables the inference of properties of dynamical systems that are too complex to express
using traditional analysis techniques. Applications span many disciplines, including fluid dynamics
[250], oceanography [107], molecular dynamics [289], and many others. Though dynamic mode
decomposition [197] is the most common technique for approximating the Koopman operator, many
recent approaches have been made to approximate Koopman operator embeddings with deep learning
models that outperform existing methods [170, 185, 191, 200, 209, 210, 260, 284, 307]. Adding
physics-based knowledge to the learning of the Koopman operator has the potential to augment
generalizability and interpretability, which current ML methods in this area tend to lack [210].
Traditional methods for ROMs often lack robustness with respect to parameter changes within
the systems they are representing [11], or are not cost-effective enough when trying to predict
complex dynamical systems (e.g., multiscale in space and time). Thus, incorporating principles from
physics-based models could potentially reduce the search space to enable more robust training of
ROMs, and also allow the model to be trained with less data in many scenarios.
2.5
Forward Solving Partial Differential Equations
In many physical systems, governing equations are known, but direct numerical solutions of partial
differential equations (PDEs) using common methods, such as the Finite Elements Method or the
Finite Difference Method [93], are prohibitively expensive. In such cases, traditional methods are
not ideal or sometimes even possible. A common technique is to use an ML model as a surrogate
for the solution to reduce computation time [75, 159]. In particular, NN solvers can reduce the high
computational demands of traditional numerical methods into a single forward-pass of a NN. Notably,
solutions obtained via NNs are also naturally differentiable and have a closed analytic form that
can be transferred to any subsequent calculations, a feature not found in more traditional solving
methods [159]. Especially with the recent advancement of computational power, neural network
models have shown success in approximating solutions across different kinds of physics-based
PDEs [15, 149, 233], including the difficult quantum many-body problem [51] and many-electron
Schrodinger equation [119]. As a step further, deep neural networks models have shown success
in approximating solutions across high dimensional physics-based PDEs previously considered
unsuitable for approximation by ML [118, 252]. However, slow convergence in training, limited
applicability to many complex systems, and reduced accuracy due to unawareness of physical laws
can prove problematic. More recently, Li et al. [171] have defined a neural Fourier operator which
allows a neural network to learn and solve an entire family of PDEs by learning the mapping from
any functional parametric dependence to the solution in Fourier space.
2.6
Inverse Modeling
The forward modeling of a physical system uses the physical parameters of the system (e.g., mass,
temperature, charge, physical dimensions or structure) to predict the next state of the system or its
effects (outputs). In contrast, inverse modeling uses the (possibly noisy) output of a system to infer the
intrinsic physical parameters or inputs. Inverse problems often stand out as important in physics-based
, Vol. 1, No. 1, Article . Publication date: March 2020.

8
Jared Willard, Xiaowei Jia, Shaoming Xu, Michael Steinbach, and Vipin Kumar
modeling communities because they can potentially shed light on valuable information that cannot
be observed directly. One example is the use of x-ray images from a CT scan to create a 3D image
reflecting the structure of part of a person’s body [183]. This can be viewed as a computer vision
problem, where, given many training datasets of x-ray scans of the body at different capture angles, a
model can be trained to inversely reconstruct textures and 3D shapes of different organs or other areas
of interest. Allowing for better reconstruction while reducing scan time could potentially increase
patient satisfaction and reduce overall medical costs. Though there are many inverse modeling
scenarios, in this work we focus on intrinsic physical parameters found in a mechanistic modeling
scenario for engineering and environmental systems.
Often, the solution of an inverse problem can be computationally expensive due to the potentially
millions of forward model evaluations needed for estimator evaluation or characterization of posterior
distributions of physical parameters [96]. ML-based surrogate models (in addition to other methods
such as reduced-order models) are becoming a realistic choice since they can model high-dimensional
phenomena with lots of data and execute much faster than most physical simulations.
Inverse problems are traditionally solved using regularized regression techniques. Data-driven
methods have seen success in inverse problems in remote sensing of surface properties [69], hydrology
[106], photonics [218], and medical imaging [183], among many others. Recently, novel algorithms
using deep learning and neural networks have been applied to inverse problems. While still in
their infancy, these techniques exhibit strong performance for applications such as computerized
tomography [57, 193, 263], seismic processing [272], or various sparse data problems.
There is also increasing interest in the inverse design of materials using ML, where desired target
properties of materials are used as input to the model to identify atomic or microscale structures that
exhibit such properties [156, 172, 222, 243]. Physics-based constraints and stopping conditions based
on material properties can be used to guide the optimization process [172, 262]. These constraints
and similar physics-guided techniques have the potential to alleviate noted challenges in inverse
modeling, particularly in scenarios with a small sample size and a paucity of ground-truth labels
[142]. The integration of prior physical knowledge is common in current approaches to the inverse
problem, and its integration into ML-based inverse models has the potential to improve data efficiency
and increase its ability to solve ill-posed inverse problems.
2.7
Discovering Governing Equations
When the governing equations of a dynamical system are known explicitly, they allow for more
robust forecasting, control, and the opportunity for analysis of system stability and bifurcations
through increased interpretability [235]. Furthermore, if a mathematical model accurately describes
the processes governing the observed data, it therefore can generalize to data outside of the training
domain. However, in many disciplines (e.g., neuroscience, cell biology, ecology, epidemiology)
dynamical systems have no formal analytic descriptions. Often in these cases, data is abundant, but
the underlying governing equations remain elusive. In this section, we discuss equation discovery
systems that do not assume the structure of the desired equation (as in Section 2.5), but rather explore
a large space of possibly nonlinear mathematical terms.
Advances in ML for the discovery of these governing equations has become an active research area
with rich potential to integrate principles from applied mathematics and physics with modern ML
methods. Early works on the data-driven discovery of physical laws relied on heuristics and expert
guidance and were focused on rediscovering known, non-differential, laws in different scientific
disciplines from artificial data [105, 162, 163, 168]. This was later expanded to include real-world
data and differential equations in ecological applications [83]. Recently, general and robust data-
driven discovery of potentially unknown governing equations has been pioneered by [38, 244], where
they apply symbolic regression to differences between computed derivatives and analytic derivatives
, Vol. 1, No. 1, Article . Publication date: March 2020.

Physics-Guided Machine Learning Survey
9
to determine underlying dynamical systems. More recently, works have used sparse regression built
on a dictionary of functions and partial derivatives to construct governing equations [43, 220, 234].
Lagergren et al. [160] expand on this by using ANNs to construct the dictionary of functions. These
sparse identification techniques are based on the principle of Occam’s Razor, where the goal is that
only a few equation terms be used to describe any given nonlinear system.
2.8
Data Generation
Data generation approaches are useful for creating virtual simulations of scientific data under
specific conditions. For example, these techniques can be used to generate potential chemical
compounds with desired characteristics (e.g., serving as catalysts or having a specific crystal structure).
Traditional physics-based approaches for generating data often rely on running physical simulations
or conducting physical experiments, which tend to be very time consuming. Also, these approaches
are restricted by what can be produced by physics-based models. Hence, there is an increasing
interest in generative ML approaches that learn data distributions in unsupervised settings and thus
have the potential to generate novel data beyond what could be produced by traditional approaches.
Generative ML models have found tremendous success in areas such as speech recognition and
generation [208], image generation [73], and natural language processing [114]. These models have
been at the forefront of unsupervised learning in recent years, mostly due to their efficiency in
understanding unlabeled data. The idea behind generative models is to capture the inner probabilistic
distribution in order to generate similar data. With the recent advances in deep learning, new
generative models, such as the generative adversarial network (GAN) and variational autoencoder
(VAE), have been developed. These models have shown much better performance in learning non-
linear relationships to extract representative latent embeddings from observation data. Hence the
data generated from the latent embeddings are more similar to true data distribution. In particular,
the adversarial component of GAN consists of a two-part framework with a generative network and
discriminative network, where the generative network’s objective is to generate fake data to fool the
discriminative network, while the discriminative network attempts to determine true data from fake
data.
In the scientific domain, GANs can generate data like the data generated by the physics-based
models. Using GANs often incurs certain benefits, including reduced computation time and a better
reproduction of complex phenomenon, given the ability of GANs to represent nonlinear relationships.
For example, Farimani et al. [91] have shown that Conditional Generative Adversarial Networks
(cGAN) can be trained to simulate heat conduction and fluid flow purely based on observations
without using knowledge of the underlying governing equations. Such approaches that use generative
models have been shown to significantly accelerate the process of generating new data samples.
However, a well-known issue of GANs is that they incur dramatically high sample complexity.
Therefore, a growing area of research is to engineer GANs that can leverage prior knowledge
of physics in terms of physical laws and invariance properties. For example, GAN-based models
for simulating turbulent flows can be further improved by incorporating physical constraints, e.g.,
conservation laws [308] and energy spectrum [291], in the loss function. Cang et al. [49] also imposed
a physics-based morphology constraint on a VAE-based generative model used for simulating artificial
material samples. The physics-based constraint forces the generated artificial samples to have the
same morphology distribution as the authentic ones and thus greatly reduces the large material design
space.
2.9
Uncertainty Quantification
Uncertainty quantification (UQ) is of great importance in many areas of computational science (e.g.,
climate modeling [74], fluid flow [65], systems engineering [217], among many others). At its core,
, Vol. 1, No. 1, Article . Publication date: March 2020.

10
Jared Willard, Xiaowei Jia, Shaoming Xu, Michael Steinbach, and Vipin Kumar
UQ requires an accurate characterization of the entire distribution 𝑝(𝑦|𝑥), where 𝑦is the response
and 𝑥is the covariate of interest, rather than just making a point prediction 𝑦= 𝑓(𝑥). This makes it
possible to characterize all quantiles and skews in the distribution, which allows for analysis such as
examining how close predictions are to being unacceptable, or sensitivity analysis of input features.
Applying UQ tasks to physics-based models using traditional methods such as Monte Carlo
(MC) is usually infeasible due to the very large number of forward model evaluations needed to
obtain convergent statistics. In the physics-based modeling community, a common technique is to
perform model reduction (described in Section 2.4) or create an ML surrogate model, in order to
increase model evaluation speed since ML models often execute much faster [99, 189, 269]. With a
similar goal, the ML community has often employed Gaussian Processes as the main technique for
quantifying uncertainty in simulating physical processes [34, 229], but neither Gaussian Processes
nor reduced models scale well to higher dimensions or larger datasets (Gaussian Processes scale as
𝒪(𝑁3) with 𝑁data points).
Consequently, there is an effort to fit deep learning models, which have exhibited countless
successes across disciplines, as a surrogate for numerical simulations in order to achieve faster model
evaluations for UQ that have greater scalability than Gaussian Processes [269]. However, since
artificial neural networks do not have UQ naturally built into them, variations have been developed.
One such modification uses a probabilistic drop-out strategy in which neurons are periodically "turned
off" as a type of Bayesian approximation to estimate uncertainty [98]. There are also Bayesian
variants of neural networks that consist of distributions of weights and biases [186, 314, 319], but
these suffer from high computation times and high dependence on reliable priors. Another method
uses an ensemble of neural networks to create a distribution from which uncertainty is quantified
[161].
The integration of physics knowledge into ML for UQ has the potential to allow for a better char-
acterization of uncertainty. For example, ML surrogate models run the risk of producing physically
inconsistent predictions, and incorporating elements of physics could help with this issue. Also, note
that the reduced data needs of ML due to constraints for adherence to known physical laws could
alleviate some of the high computational cost of Bayesian neural networks for UQ.
3
PHYSICS-ML METHODS
Given the diversity of forms in which scientific knowledge is represented in different disciplines and
applications, researchers have developed a large variety of methods for integrating physical principles
into ML models. This section categorizes them into the following four classes; (i) physics-guided
loss function, (ii) physics-guided initialization, (iii) physics-guided design of architecture, and (iv)
hybrid modeling.
Choosing between different classes of methods for a given problem can depend on many factors
including the availability and performance of existing mechanistic models, and also the general
computational objectives that need to be addressed. The general computational objectives of physics-
ML methods described throughout this section, as opposed to traditional ML methods, can be placed
into three categories. First, prediction performance defined as better matching between predicted
and observed values can be improved in a variety of ways including improved generalizability to
out-of-sample scenarios, improved general accuracy, or forcing solutions to be physically consistent
(e.g. obeying known physics-based governing equations). Second, sample efficiency can be improved
by reducing the number of observations required for adequate performance or reducing the overall
search space. The third general computational objective is interpretability, where often traditional ML
models are a "black box" and the incorporation of scientific knowledge can shine light on physical
meanings, interpretations, and processes within the ML framework. Even though computational
objectives can be categorized within these categories, there is also overlap between them. For
, Vol. 1, No. 1, Article . Publication date: March 2020.

Physics-Guided Machine Learning Survey
11
example, forcing models to be physically consistent can effectively reduce the solution search space.
Improved sample efficiency can also lead to improved prediction performance by getting more value
out of each observation. We end this section with a summary and detailed discussion comparing
different kinds of methods, their requirements, and the general computational objectives achieved.
3.1
Physics-Guided Loss Function
Scientific problems often exhibit a high degree of complexity due to relationships between many
physical variables varying across space and time at different scales. Standard ML models can fail
to capture such relationships directly from data, especially when provided with limited observation
data. This is one reason for their failure to generalize to scenarios not encountered in training data.
Researchers are beginning to incorporate physical knowledge into loss functions to help ML models
capture generalizable dynamic patterns consistent with established physical laws.
One of the most common techniques to make ML models consistent with physical laws is to
incorporate physical constraints into the loss function of ML models as follows [141],
Loss = LossTRN(𝑌true,𝑌pred) + 𝜆𝑅(𝑊) + 𝛾LossPHY(𝑌pred)
(1)
where the training loss LossTRN measures a supervised error (e.g., RMSE or cross-entropy) between
true labels 𝑌true and predicted labels 𝑌pred, and 𝜆is a hyper-parameter to control the weight of model
complexity loss 𝑅(𝑊). The first two terms are the standard loss of ML models. The addition of
physics-based loss LossPHY aims to ensure consistency with physical laws and it is weighted by a
hyper-parameter 𝛾, where 𝛾is determined alongside other ML hyperparameters using validation
data or a nested cross validation setup. A comprehensive guide to implementing physics-based loss
functions can be found in Ebert-Uphoff et al. [84].
Steering ML predictions towards physically consistent outputs has numerous benefits. First, this
provides the possibility to ensure the consistency with physical laws and therefore reduce the solution
search space of ML models. Second, the regularization by physical constraints allows the model to
learn even with unlabeled data, as the computation of physics-based loss LossPHY does not require
observation data. Third, ML models which follow desired physical properties are more likely to be
generalizable to out-of-sample scenarios relative to basic ML models[133, 231]. It is important to
note, however, that the physics-guided loss function does not "guarantee" either physical consistency
or generalizability as it is fundamentally a weak constraint. Loss function terms corresponding
to physical constraints are applicable across many different types of ML frameworks. In addition,
this method is extensively used across all application-centric objectives listed in Section 2. In the
following paragraphs, we demonstrate the use of physics-based loss functions for different objectives
described in Section 2.
Replacing or improving over physical models. Incorporation of physics-based loss has shown great
success in improving prediction ability of ML models. In the context of lake temperature modeling,
Karpatne et al. [140] includes a physics-based penalty that ensures that predictions of denser water
are at lower depths than predictions of less dense water, a known monotonic relationship.
Jia et al. [130] and Read et al. [231] further extended this work to capture even more complex and
general physical relationships that happen on a temporal scale. Specifically, they use a physics-based
penalty for energy conservation in the loss function to ensure the lake thermal energy gain across
time is consistent with the net thermodynamic fluxes in and out of the lake. A diagram of this
model is shown in Figure 2. Note that the recurrent structure contains additional nodes (shown in
blue) to represent physical variables (lake energy, etc) that are computed using purely physics-based
equations. These are needed to incorporate energy conservation in the loss function. Similar structure
can be used to model other physical laws such as mass conservation, etc. Qualitative mathematical
, Vol. 1, No. 1, Article . Publication date: March 2020.

12
Jared Willard, Xiaowei Jia, Shaoming Xu, Michael Steinbach, and Vipin Kumar
Fig. 2. The Physics-Guided Recurrent Neural Network (PGRNN) model demonstrated in Jia et al.
[132] is an example of a physics-guided loss function allowing physical knowledge to be incorporated
into the ML model. They include the standard RNN flow (black arrows) and the energy flow (blue
arrows) in the recurrent process. Here 𝑈𝑇represents the thermal energy of the lake at time 𝑇, and
both the energy output and temperature output 𝑦𝑇are used in calculating the loss function value.
This enables the PGRNN to predict lake temperature without violating energy constraints. A detailed
description of the loss function equation (Equation 1) can be found in Section 3.1.
properties of dynamical systems modeling have also shown promise in informing loss functions to
improve prediction beyond that of the physics model. Erichson et al. [86] penalize autoencoders
based on physically meaningful stability measures in dynamical systems to improve prediction of
fluid flow and sea surface temperature. They showed an improved mapping of past states to future
states for both modeling scenarios in addition to improving generalizability to new data.
Solving PDEs. Another strand of work that involves loss function alterations is solving PDEs
for dynamical systems modeling, in which adherence to the governing equations is enforced in the
loss function. In Raissi et al. [228], this concept is developed and shown to create data-efficient
spatiotemporal function approximators to both solve and find parameters of basic PDEs like Burgers
Equation or Schrodinger Equation. Going beyond a simple feed-forward network, Zhu et al. [318]
propose an encoder-decoder model for predicting transient PDEs with governing PDE constraints.
Geneva et al. [102] extended this approach to deep auto-regressive dense encoder-decoders with a
Bayesian framework using stochastic weight averaging to quantify uncertainty.
Discovering Governing Equations. Physics-based loss function terms have also been used in
the discovery of governing equations. Loiseau et al. [178] used constrained least squares [110] to
incorporate energy-preserving nonlinearities or to enforce symmetries in the identified equations
for the equation learning process described in Section 2.7. Though these loss functions are mostly
seen in common variants of NNs, they are also be seen in architectures such as echo state networks.
Doan et al. [76] found that integrating the physics-based loss from the governing equations in a
Lorenz system, a commonly studied system in dynamical systems, strongly improves the echo state
network’s time-accurate prediction of the system and also reduces convergence time.
, Vol. 1, No. 1, Article . Publication date: March 2020.

Physics-Guided Machine Learning Survey
13
Inverse modeling. For applications in vortex induced vibrations, Raissi et al. [224] pose the inverse
modeling problem of predicting the lift and drag forces of a system given sparse data about its
velocity field. Kahana et al. [136] uses a loss function term pertaining to the physical consistency
of the time evolution of waves for the inverse problem of identifying the location of an underwater
obstacle from acoustic measurements. In both cases, the addition of physics-based loss terms made
results more accurate and more robust to out-of-sample scenarios.
Parameterization. While ML has been used for parameterization, adding physics-based loss
terms can further benefit this process by ensuring physically consistent outputs. Zhang et al. [310]
parameterize atomic energy for molecular dynamics using a NN with a loss function that takes into
account atomic force, atomic energy, and terms relating kinetic and potential energy. Furthermore, in
climate modeling, Beucler et al. show that enforcing energy conservation laws improves prediction
when emulating cloud processes [31, 32].
Downscaling. Super resolution and downscaling frameworks have also begun to incorporate
physics-based constraints. Jiang et al. [134] use PDE-based constraints for super resolution problems
in computational fluid dynamics where they are able to more efficiently recover physical quantities
of interest. Bode et al. [37] use similar constraint ideas in building generative adversarial networks
for super resolution in turbulence modeling in combustion scenarios, where they find improved
generalization capability and extrapolation due to the constraints.
Uncertainty quantification. In Yang et al. [303] and Yang et al. [304], physics-based loss is imple-
mented in a deep probabilistic generative model for uncertainty quantification based on adherence
to the structure imposed by PDEs. To accomplish this, they construct probabilistic representations
of the system states, and use an adversarial inference procedure to train using a physics-based
loss function that enforces adherence to the governing laws. This is expanded in Zhu et al. [318],
where a physics-informed encoder-decoder network is defined in conjunction with a conditional
flow-based generative model for similar purposes. A similar loss function modification is performed
in other works [102, 144, 299], but for the purpose of solving high dimensional stochastic PDEs with
uncertainty propagation. In these cases, physics-guided constraints provide effective regularization
for training deep generative models to serve as surrogates of physical systems where the cost of
acquiring data is high and the data sets are small [304].
Another direction for encoding physics knowledge into ML UQ applications is to create a physics-
guided Bayesian NN. This is explored in Yang et al. [300], where they use a Bayesian NN, which
naturally encodes uncertainty, as a surrogate for a PDE solution. Additionally, they add a PDE
constraint for the governing laws of the system to serve as a prior for the Bayesian net, allowing for
more accurate predictions in situations with significant noise due to the physics-based regularization.
Generative models. In recent years, GANs have been used to efficiently generate solutions to
PDEs and there is interest in using physics knowledge to improve them. Yang et al. [301] showed
GANs with loss functions based on PDEs can be used to solve stochastic elliptic PDEs in up to 30
dimensions. In a similar vein, Wu et al. [292] showed that physics-based loss functions in GANs
can lower the amount of data and training time needed to converge on solutions of turbulence PDEs,
while Shah et al. [248] saw similar results in the generation of microstructures satisfying certain
physical properties in computational materials science.
3.2
Physics-Guided Initialization
Since many ML models require an initial choice of model parameters before training, researchers
have explored different ways to physically inform a model starting state. For example, in NNs,
weights are often initialized according to a random distribution prior to training. Poor initialization
, Vol. 1, No. 1, Article . Publication date: March 2020.

14
Jared Willard, Xiaowei Jia, Shaoming Xu, Michael Steinbach, and Vipin Kumar
can cause models to anchor in local minima, which is especially true for deep neural networks.
However, if physical or other contextual knowledge is used to help inform the initialization of the
weights, model training can be accelerated and may require fewer training samples [132]. One way
to inform the initialization to assist in model training and escaping local minima is to use an ML
technique known as transfer learning. In transfer learning, a model is pre-trained on a related task
prior to being fine-tuned with limited training data to fit the desired task. The pre-trained model
serves as an informed initial state that ideally is closer to the desired parameters for the desired task
than random initialization. One way to achieve this is to use the physics-based model’s simulated
data to pre-train the ML model. This is similar to the common application of pre-training in computer
vision, where CNNs are often pre-trained with very large image datasets before being fine-tuned on
images from the task at hand [259].
Jia et al. use this strategy in the context of modeling lake temperature dynamics [130, 132]. They
pre-train their Physics-Guided Recurrent Neural Network (PGRNN) models for lake temperature
modeling on simulated data generated from a physics-based model and fine tune the NN with
little observed data. They showed that pre-training, even using data from a physical model with an
incorrect set of parameters, can still significantly reduce the training data needed for a quality model.
In addition, Read et al. [231] demonstrated that models using both physics-guided initialization
and a physics-guided loss function are able to generalize better to unseen scenarios than traditional
physics-based models. In this case, physics-guided initialization allows the model to have a physically-
consistent starting state prior to seeing any observations.
Another application can be seen in robotics, where images from robotics simulations have been
shown to be sufficient without any real-world data for the task of object localization [267], while
reducing data requirements by a factor of 50 for object grasping [39]. Then, in autonomous vehicle
training, Shah et al. [247] showed that pre-training the driving algorithm in a simulator built on a
video game physics engine can drastically lessen data needs. More generally, we see that simulation-
based pre-training of applications allows for significantly less expensive data collection than is
possible with physical robots.
Physics-guided model initialization has also been employed in chemical process modeling [180,
181, 298]. Yan et al. [298] use Gaussian process regression for process modeling that has been
transferred and adapted from a similar task. To adapt the transferred model, they used scale-bias
correcting functions optimized through maximum likelihood estimation of parameters. Furthermore,
Gaussian process models come equipped with uncertainty quantification which is also informed
through initialization. A similar transfer and adapt approach is seen in Lu et al. [180], but for an
ensemble of NNs transferred from related tasks. In both studies, the similarity metrics used to find
similar systems are defined by considering various common process characteristics and behaviors.
Physics-guided initialization can also be done using a self-supervised learning method, which
has been widely used in computer vision and natural language processing. In the self-supervised
setting, deep neural networks learn discriminative representations using pseudo labels created from
pre-defined pretext tasks. These pretext tasks are designed to extract complex patterns related to our
target prediction task. For example, the pretext task can be defined to predict intermediate physical
variables that play an important role in underlying processes. This approach can make use of a
physics-based model to simulate these intermediate physical variables, which can then be used to
pre-train ML models by adding supervision on hidden layers. As an illustration of this approach,
Jia et al. [133] have shown promising results for modeling temperature and flow in river networks
by using upstream water variables simulated by a physics-based PRMS-SNTemp model [265] to
pre-train hidden variables in a graph neural network.
, Vol. 1, No. 1, Article . Publication date: March 2020.

Physics-Guided Machine Learning Survey
15
3.3
Physics-Guided Design of Architecture
Although the physics-based loss and initialization in the previous sections help constrain the search
space of ML models during training, the ML architecture is often still a black box. In particular, they
do not encode physical consistency or other desired physical properties into the ML architecture. A
recent research direction has been to construct new ML architectures that can make use of the specific
characteristics of the problem being solved. Furthermore, incorporating physics-based guidance
into architecture design has the added bonus of making the previously black box algorithm more
interpretable, a desirable but typically missing feature of ML models used in physical modeling. In
the following paragraphs, we discuss several contexts in which physics-guided ML architectures
have been used. Much of the work in this section is focused largely on neural network architectures.
The modular and flexible nature of NNs in particular makes them prime candidates for architecture
modification. For example, domain knowledge can be used to specify node connections that capture
physics-based dependencies among variables. We also include subsections on multi-task learning and
structures of Gaussian processes to show how task interrelationships or informed prior distributions
can inform ML models.
Intermediate Physical Variables. One way to embed physical principles into NN design is to
ascribe physical meaning for certain neurons in the NN. It is also possible to declare physically
relevant variables explicitly. In lake temperature modeling, Daw et al. [68] incorporate a physical
intermediate variable as part of a monotonicity-preserving structure in the LSTM architecture. This
model produces physically consistent predictions in addition to appending a dropout layer to quantify
uncertainty. Muralidlar et al. [204] used a similar approach to insert physics-constrained variables as
the intermediate variables in the convolutional neural network (CNN) architecture which achieved
significant improvement over state-of-the-art physics-based models on the problem of predicting
drag force on particle suspensions in moving fluids.
An additional benefit of adding physically relevant intermediate variables in an ML architecture
is that they can help extract physically meaningful hidden representation that can be interpreted by
domain scientists. This is particularly valuable, as standard deep learning models are limited in their
interpretability since they can only extract abstract hidden variables using highly complex connected
structure. This is further exacerbated given the randomness involved in the optimization process.
Another related approach is to fix one or more weights within the NN to physically meaningful
values or parameters and make them non-modifiable during training. A recent approach is seen in
geophysics where researchers use NNs for the waveform inversion modeling to find subsurface
parameters from seismic wave data. In Sun et al. [256], they assign most of the parameters within a
network to mimic seismic wave propagation during forward propagation of the NN, with weights
corresponding to values in known governing equations. They show this leads to more robust training
in addition a more interpretable NN with meaningful intermediate variables.
Encoding invariances and symmetries. In physics, there is a deep connection between symmetries
and invariant quantities of a system and its dynamics. For example, Noether’s Law, a common
paradigm in physics, demonstrates a mapping between conserved quantities of a system and the
system’s symmetries (e.g. translational symmetry can be shown to correspond to the conservation of
momentum within a system). Therefore, if an ML model is created that is translation-invariant, the
conservation of momentum becomes more likely and the model’s prediction becomes more robust
and generalizable.
State-of-the-art deep learning architectures already encode certain types of invariance. For example,
RNNs encode temporal invariance and CNNs can implicitly encode spatial translation, rotation, and
scale invariance. In the same way, scientific modeling tasks may require other invariances based
, Vol. 1, No. 1, Article . Publication date: March 2020.

16
Jared Willard, Xiaowei Jia, Shaoming Xu, Michael Steinbach, and Vipin Kumar
on physical laws. In turbulence modeling and fluid dynamics, Ling et al [173] define a tensor basis
neural network to embed rotational invariance into a NN for improved prediction accuracy. This
solves a key problem in ML models for turbulence modeling because without rotational invariance,
the model evaluated on identical flows with axes defined in other directions could yield different
predictions. This work alters the NN architecture by adding a higher-order multiplicative layer
that ensures the predictions lie on a rotationally invariant tensor basis. In a molecular dynamics
application, Anderson et al. [12] show that a rotationally covariant NN architecture can learn the
behavior and properties of complex many-body physical systems.
In a general setting, Wang et al. [281] show how spatiotemporal models can be made more
generalizable by incorporating symmetries into deep NNs. More specifically, they demonstrated the
encoding of translational symmetries, rotational symmetries, scale invariances, and uniform motion
into NNs using customized convolutional layers in CNNs that enforce desired invariance properties.
They also provided theoretical guarantees of invariance properties across the different designs and
showed additional to significant increases in generalization performance.
Incorporating symmetries, by informing the structure of the solution space, also has the potential
to reduce the search space of an ML algorithm. This is important in the application of discovering
governing equations, where the space of mathematical terms and operators is exponentially large.
Though in its infancy, physics-informed architectures for discovering governing equations are
beginning to be investigated by researchers. In Section 2.7, symbolic regression is mentioned as
an approach that has shown success. However, given the massive search space of mathematical
operators, analytic functions, constants, and state variables, the problem can quickly become NP-hard.
Udrescu et al. [270] designs a recursive multidimensional version of symbolic regression that uses a
NN in conjunction with techniques from physics to narrow the search space. Their idea is to use NNs
to discover hidden signs of "simplicity", such as symmetry or separability in the training data, which
enables breaking the massive search space into smaller ones with fewer variables to be determined.
In the context of molecular dynamics applications, a number of researchers [28, 310] have used a
NN per individual atom to calculate each atom’s contribution to the total energy. Then, to ensure
the energy invariance with respect to the possibility of interchanging two atoms, the structure of
each NN and the values of each network’s weight parameters are constrained to be identical for
atoms of the same element. More recently, novel deep learning architectures have been proposed for
fundamental invariances in chemistry. Schutt et al. [245] proposes continuous-filter convolutional
(cfconv) layers for CNNs to allow for modeling objects with arbitrary positions such as atoms in
molecules, in contrast to objects described by Cartesian-gridded data such as images. Furthermore,
their architecture uses atom-wise layers that incorporate inter-atomic distances that enabled the
model to respect quantum-chemical constraints such as rotationally invariant energy predictions
as well as energy-conserving force predictions. As we can see, because molecular dynamics often
ascribes importance to different important geometric properties of molecules (e.g. rotation), network
architectures dealing with invariances can be effective for improving performance and robustness of
ML models.
Architecture modifications incorporating symmetry are also seen extensively in dynamical systems
research involving differential equations. In a pioneering work by Ruthotto et al [236], three variations
of CNNs are proposed to improve classifiers for images. Each variation uses mathematical theories
to guide the design of the CNN based on fundamental properties of PDEs. Multiple types of
modifications are made, including adding symmetry layers to guarantee the stability expressed
by the PDEs and layers that convert inputs to kinematic eigenvalues that satisfy certain physical
properties. They define a parabolic CNN inspired by anisotropic filtering, a hyperbolic CNN based
on Hamiltonian systems, and a second order hyperbolic CNN. Hyperbolic CNNs were found to
preserve the energy in the system as intended, which set them apart from parabolic CNNs that
, Vol. 1, No. 1, Article . Publication date: March 2020.

Physics-Guided Machine Learning Survey
17
smooth the output data, reducing the energy. Furthermore, though solving PDEs with neural networks
has traditionally focused on learning on Euclidean spaces, recently Li et al. [171] proposed a new
architecture which includes "Fourier neural operators" to generalize this to functional spaces. They
showed it achieves greater accuracy compared to previous ML-based solvers and also can solve entire
families of PDEs instead of just one. There is a vast amount of other work using physics-guided
architecture towards solving PDEs and other PDE-related applications as well which are not included
in this survey (e.g. see ICLR workshop on deep learning for differential equations ([5]))
A recent direction also relating to conserved or invariant quantities is the incorporation of the
Hamiltonian operator into NNs [64, 112, 268, 317]. The Hamiltonian operator in physics is the
primary tool for modeling the time evolution of systems with conserved quantities, but until recently
the formalism had not been integrated with NNs. Greydanus et al. [112] design a NN architecture that
naturally learns and respects energy conservation and other invariance laws in simple mass-spring
or pendulum systems. They accomplish this through predicting the Hamiltonian of the system and
re-integrating instead of predicting the state of physical systems themselves. This is taken a step
further in Toth et al. [268], where they show that not only can NNs learn the Hamiltonian, but
also the abstract phase space (assumed to be known in Greydanus et al. [112]) to more effectively
model expressive densities in similar physical systems and also extend more generally to other
problems in physics. Recently, the Hamiltonian-parameterized NNs above have also been expanded
into NN architectures that perform additional differential equation-based integration steps based on
the derivatives approximated by the Hamiltonian network [61].
Encoding other domain-specific physical knowledge. Various other domain-specific physical
information can be encoded into architecture that doesn’t exactly correspond to known invariances
but provides meaningful structure to the optimization process depending on the task at hand. This
can take place in many ways, including using domain-informed convolutions for CNNs, additional
domain-informed discriminators in GANs, or structures informed by the physical characteristics
of the problem. For example, Sadoughi et al. [239] prepend a CNN with a Fast Fourier Transform
layer and a physics-guided convolution layer based on known physical information pertaining to
fault detection of rolling element bearings. A similar approach is used in Sturmfels et al. [255], but
the added beginning layer instead serves to segment different areas of the brain for domain guidance
in neuroimaging tasks. In the context of generative models, Xie et al. [296] introduce tempoGAN,
which augments a general adversarial network with an additional discriminator network along with
additional loss function terms that preserve temporal coherence in the generation of physics-based
simulations of fluid flow. This type of approach, though found mostly in NN models, has been
extended to non-NN models in Baseman et al. [24], where they introduce a physics-guided Markov
Random Field that encodes spatial and physical properties of computer memory devices into the
corresponding probabilistic dependencies.
Fan et al. [89] define new architectures to solve the inverse problem of electrical impedance
tomography, where the goal is to determine the electrical conductivity distribution of an unknown
medium from electrical measurements along its boundary. They define new NN layers based on a
linear approximation of both the forward and inverse maps relying on the nonstandard form of the
wavelet decomposition [33].
Architecture modifications are also seen in dynamical systems research encoding principles
from differential equations. Chen et al. [58] develop a continuous depth NN based on the Residual
Network [122] for solving ordinary differential equations. They change the traditionally discretized
neuron layer depths into continuous equivalents such that hidden states can be parameterized by
differential equations in continuous time. This allows for increased computational efficiency due
to the simplification of the backpropagation step of training, and also creates a more scalable
, Vol. 1, No. 1, Article . Publication date: March 2020.

18
Jared Willard, Xiaowei Jia, Shaoming Xu, Michael Steinbach, and Vipin Kumar
normalizing flow, an architectural component for solving PDEs. This is done by by parameterizing
the derivative of the hidden states of the NN as opposed to the states themselves. Then, in a similar
application, Chang et al. [53] uses principles from the stability properties of differential equations in
dynamical systems modeling to guide the design of the gating mechanism and activation functions in
an RNN.
Currently, human experts have manually developed the majority of domain knowledge-encoded
employed architectures, which can be a time-intensive and error-prone process. Because of this, there
is increasing interest in automated neural architecture search methods [20, 85, 126]. A young but
promising direction in ML architecture design is to embed prior physical knowledge into neural
architecture searches. Ba et al. [18] adds physically meaningful input nodes and physical operations
between nodes to the neural architecture search space to enable the search algorithm to discover
more ideal physics-guided ML architectures.
Auxiliary Task in Multi-Task Learning. Domain knowledge can be incorporated into ML architec-
ture as auxiliary tasks in a multi-task learning framework. Multi-task learning allows for multiple
learning tasks to be solved at the same time, ideally while exploiting commonalities and differences
across tasks. This can result in improved learning efficiency and predictions for one or more of
the tasks. Therefore, another way to implement physics-based learning constraints is to use an
auxiliary task in a multi-task learning framework. Here, an example of an auxiliary task in a multi-
task framework might be related to ensuring physically consistent solutions in addition to accurate
predictions. The promise of such an approach was demonstrated for a computer vision task by
integrating auxiliary information (e.g. pose estimation) for facial landmark detection [315]. In this
paradigm, a task-constrained loss function can be formulated to allow errors of related tasks to be
back-propagated jointly to improve model generalization. Early work in a computational chemistry
application showed that a NN could be trained to predict energy by constructing a loss function
that had penalties for both inaccuracy and inaccurate energy derivatives with respect to time as
determined by the surrounding energy force field [219]. In particle physics, De Oliveira et al. [72]
uses an additional task for the discriminator network in a generative adversarial network (GAN) to
satisfy certain properties of particle interaction for the production of jet images of particle energy.
Physics-guided Gaussian process regression. Gaussian process regression (GPR) [287] is a non-
parametric, Bayesian approach to regression that is increasingly being used in ML applications. GPR
has several benefits, including working well on small amounts of data and enabling uncertainty
measurements on predictions. In GPR, first a Gaussian process prior must be assumed in the form of
a mean function and a matrix-valued kernel or covariance function. One way to incorporate physical
knowledge in GPR is to encode differential equations into the kernel [258]. This is a key feature in
Latent Force Models which attempt to use equations in the physical model of the system to inform
the learning from data [10, 182]. Alvarez et al. [10] draw inspiration from similar applications in
bioinformatics [101, 165], which showed an increase in predictive ability in computational biology,
motion capture, and geostatistics datasets. More recently, Glielmo et al. [108] propose a vectorial
GPR that encodes physical knowledge in the matrix-valued kernel function. They show rotation and
reflection symmetry of the interatomic force between atoms can be encoded in the Gaussian process
with specific invariance-preserving covariant kernels. Furthermore, Raissi et al. [225] show that the
covariance function can explicitly encode the underlying physical laws expressed by differential
equations in order to solve PDEs and learn with smaller datasets.
3.4
Hybrid Physics-ML Models
Contrary to previous sections where the focus has been on augmenting ML models specifically,
numerous approaches combine physics-based models with ML models where both are operating
, Vol. 1, No. 1, Article . Publication date: March 2020.

Physics-Guided Machine Learning Survey
19
simultaneously. We call these Hybrid Physics-ML models. In the context of Figure 1, hybrid models
can be viewed as replacing mechanistic model 𝐹() with a new model in which 𝐹() and an ML model
are working together, or a subcomponent of 𝐹() is replaced with ML. Hence, such methods are also
referred to as ML-enhanced physical models by some researchers [100].
3.4.1
Residual modeling. The oldest and most common approach for directly addressing the
imperfection of physics-based models in the scientific community is residual modeling, where an ML
model (usually linear regression) learns to predict the errors, or residuals, made by a physics-based
model [94, 266]. A visualization is shown in Figure 3. The key concept is to learn biases of the
physical model (relative to observations) and use it to correct the physical model’s predictions.
However, one key limitation in residual modeling is its inability to enforce physics-based constraints
(like in Section 3.1) because such approaches model the errors instead of the physical quantities in
scientific problems.
Fig. 3. An illustration of the concept of residual modeling where an ML model 𝑓𝑀𝐿is trained to model
the error made by the physics-based model 𝑓𝑃𝐻𝑌. Final predictions are then the sum of the predictions
made by 𝑓𝑃𝐻𝑌and the residual modeled by 𝑓𝑀𝐿. Processes shown in red and blue are training and
testing respectively. Figure adapted from [94].
Recently, a key area in which residual modeling has been applied is in reduced order models
(ROMs) of dynamical systems (described in Section 2.4). After reducing model complexity to create
a ROM, an ML model can be used to model the residual due to the truncation. ROM methods were
created in response to the problem of many detailed simulations being too expensive to be used in
various engineering tasks including design optimization and real-time decision support. In San et
al. [241, 242], a simple NN used to model the error due to the model reduction is shown to sharply
reduce high error regions when applied to known differential equations. Also, in Wan et al. [278], an
RNN is used to model the residual between a ROM for prediction of extreme weather events and the
available data projected to a reduced-order space.
As another example, in Kani et al. [138] a physics-driven "deep residual recurrent neural network
(DR-RNN)" is proposed to find the residual minimiser of numerically discretized PDEs. Their
architecture involves a stacked RNN embedded with the dynamical structure of the PDEs such
that each layer of the RNN solves a layer of the residual equations. They showed that DR-RNN
sharply reduces both computational cost and time discretization error of the reduced order modeling
framework. Finally in Blakseth et al. [36], a feed-forward neural network is used generate a corrective
source term that augments the discretized governing equation of a physics-based model for improved
prediction performance. This is a more advanced residual model since the ML model is modifying
the governing equation itself instead of just the output.
, Vol. 1, No. 1, Article . Publication date: March 2020.

20
Jared Willard, Xiaowei Jia, Shaoming Xu, Michael Steinbach, and Vipin Kumar
3.4.2
Output of physical model as input to ML model. In recent years many other hybrid
physics-ML models have been created that extend beyond residual modeling. Another straightforward
method to combine physics-based and ML models is to feed the output of a physics-based model
as input to an ML model. Karpatne et al [140] showed that using the output of a physics-based
model as one feature in an ML model along with inputs used to drive the physics-based model for
lake temperature modeling can improve predictions. Visualization of this method is shown in Figure
4. As we discuss below, there are multiple other ways of constructing a hybrid model, including
replacing part of a larger physical model, or weighting predictions from different modeling paradigms
depending on context.
Fig. 4. Diagram of a hybrid physics-ML model which accepts the output of a physical model as input
to an ML model (Figure adapted from Karpatne et al. [140]). In the diagram, the physics-based model
converts the input drivers 𝐷to simulated outputs 𝑌𝑃𝐻𝑌. Then, the hybrid physics-ML model 𝑓𝐻𝑃𝐷
jointly uses the input drivers 𝐷and the simulated outputs 𝑌𝑃𝐻𝑌to make the final prediction 𝑌𝑝𝑟𝑒𝑑
3.4.3
Replacing part of a physical model with ML. In one variant of hybrid physics-ML models,
ML models are used to replace one or more components of a physics-based model or to predict an
intermediate quantity that is poorly modeled using physics. For example, to improve predictions
of the discrepancy of Reynolds-Averaged Navier–Stokes (RANS) solvers in fluid dynamics, Parish
et al. [212] propose a NN to estimate variables in the turbulence closure model to account for
missing physics. They show this correction to traditional turbulence models results in convincing
improvements of predictions. In Hamilton et al. [117], a subset of the mechanistic model’s equations
are replaced with data-driven nonparametric methods to improve prediction beyond the baseline
process model. In Zhang et al. [312], a physics-based architecture for power system state estimation
embeds a deep learning model in place of traditional predicting and optimization techniques. To do
this, they substitute NN layers into an unrolled version of an existing solution framework which
drastically reduced the overall computational cost due to the fast forward evaluation property of NNs,
but kept information of the underlying physical models of power grids and of physical constraints.
ML models for parameterization (see Section 2.3) can also be viewed as a type of hybrid modeling.
The vast majority of these efforts use black box ML models [52, 109, 207, 230], but some of these
parameterization models can use more sophisticated physics-guided versions of ML as we mentioned
in Section 3.1.
3.4.4
Combining predictions from both physical model and ML model. In another class of
hybrid frameworks, the overall prediction is a combination of predictions from a physical model
and an ML model, where the weights depend on prediction circumstance. For example, long-range
interactions (e.g. gravity) can often be more easily modeled by classical physics equations than more
, Vol. 1, No. 1, Article . Publication date: March 2020.

Physics-Guided Machine Learning Survey
21
stochastic short-range interactions (quantum mechanics) that are better modeled using data-driven
alternatives. Hybrid frameworks like this have been used to adaptively combine ML predictions for
short-range processes and physics model predictions for long-range processes for applications in
chemical reactivity [305] and seismic activity prediction [211]. Estimator quality at a given time and
location can also be used to determine whether a prediction comes from the physical model or the
ML model, which was shown in Chen et al. [60] for air pollution estimation and in Vlachas et al.
[276] for dynamical system forecasting more generally. In the context of solving PDEs, Malek et al
[188] showcases a hybrid NN and traditional optimization technique to find the closed analytical
form of the solution of a PDE. In this hybrid solver, there exist two terms, a term described by the
NN and a term described by traditional optimization techniques.
3.4.5
ML informing or augmenting physics-model for inverse modeling. Moreover, in inverse
modeling, there is a growing use of hybrid models that first use physics-based models to perform
the direct inversion, then use deep learning models to further refine the inverse model’s predictions.
Multiple works have shown an effective application for this in computed tomography (CT) reconstruc-
tions [45, 135]. Another common technique in inverse modeling of images (e.g. medical imaging,
particle physics imaging), is the use of CNNs as deep image priors [271]. To simultaneously exploit
data and prior knowledge, Senouf et al. [246] embed a CNN that serves as the image prior for a
physics-based forward model for MRIs.
3.5
Requirements and Benefits from Different Physics-ML Methodologies
Physics-ML Method
Requirements
Possible Benefits
Loss Function
Known physical relationship
(e.g. physical laws, PDEs)
Physical consistency,
Improved generalization,
Reduced observations required,
Improved accuracy
Initialization
Synthetic data from mechanistic model
available during training
Reduced observations required
Improved accuracy
Architecture
Intermediate physical variables/processes,
or hard constraints (e.g. symmetries),
or task interrelationships,
or informed prior distributions
Interpretability,
Physical consistency,
Improved generalization,
Reduced solution search space,
Improved accuracy
Hybrid
Operational mechanistic model
available during run time
Improved accuracy
Table 2. Summary of requirements and possible benefits from different physics-ML methodologies.
The left column corresponds to the four types of methods described earlier in Section 3
Methodologies for integrating scientific knowledge in ML described in this section encompass the
vast majority of work on this topic. Table 2 summarizes these by listing the requirements needed
for different types of methods and the corresponding possible benefits. As we can see, depending
on the context of the problem or available resources, different methods can be optimal. Hybrid
methods like residual modeling are the simplest case, as they require no process-based knowledge
beyond an operational mechanistic model to be used during run time. Physics-guided loss functions
, Vol. 1, No. 1, Article . Publication date: March 2020.

22
Jared Willard, Xiaowei Jia, Shaoming Xu, Michael Steinbach, and Vipin Kumar
require additional domain expertise to determine what terms to add to the loss function, and ML
cross-validation techniques are also recommended to weight the different loss function terms. Many
of the foundational works on physics-guided loss functions also include open source code that could
be adapted to new applications (e.g. Raissi et al. [226], Read et al. [231], Wang et al. [282]). For
physics-guided initialization, domain expertise can be used to determine the most relevant synthetic
data for the application, but the ML can remain process-agnostic. Physics-guided architecture is
often the most complex approach, where both domain and ML expertise is needed, for example,
to customize neural networks by establishing physically meaningful connections and nodes. Note
that there can also be multiple Physics-ML method options for a given computational benefit. For
example, incorporating physical consistency into ML models can be done through weak constraints
as in a loss function, hard constraints through new architectures, or indirectly through physically
consistent training data from a mechanistic model simulation.
Note that for a given application-centric objective, only some of these methods may be applicable.
For example, hybrid methods will not be suitable for solving PDEs since the goal of reduced
computational complexity cannot be reached if the existing solver is still needed to produce the
output (𝑦𝑡in Figure 1). Also in the case of discovering governing equations, there often isn’t a
known physical model to compare to for either creating a residual model or hybrid approach. Data
generation applications also do not make sense for residual modeling since the purpose is to simulate
a data distribution rather than improve on a physical model.
Many of the physics-ML methods can also be combined. For example, a physics-guided loss
function, physics-guided architecture, and physics-guided initialization could all be applied to an
ML model. We saw in Section 3.1 that Jia et al. [130] and Read et al. [231] in particular combined
physics-guided loss functions with physics-guided initialization. Also, Karpatne et al [140] combined
a physics-guided loss function with a hybrid physics-ML framework. More recently, Jia et al [133]
combine physics-guided initialization and physics-guided architecture.
An overall goal of physics-ML methods presented in this section is to address resource efficiency
issues (i.e., the ability to solve problems with less computational resources in the context of ob-
jectives defined in Section 2) while maintaining high predictive performance, sample efficiency,
and interpretability relative to traditional ML approaches. For example, physics-ML methods for
solving PDEs (Section 2.5) are likely to be more computationally efficient than direct numerical
approaches and more physically consistent than traditional ML approaches. As another example, for
the objective of downscaling (Section 2.2), physics-ML methods can be expected to provide high
resolution 𝑦𝑡but at much smaller computational cost than possible via traditional mechanistic models
and provide much better quality output while using fewer training samples relative to traditional ML
approaches. Another major utility of physics-ML methods is to reduce the overall solution search
space, which has a direct impact on sample efficiency (i.e. reduced number of observations required)
and the amount of computation time taken for model training. For example, physics-ML methods for
discovering governing equations can be expected to work with much fewer observations and take
less computation time relative to traditional ML methods.
4
AREAS OF CURRENT WORK AND POSSIBILITIES FOR CROSS-FERTILIZATION
Table 3 provides a systematic organization and taxonomy of the application-centric objectives and
methods of existing physics-based ML applications. This table provides a convenient organization
for papers discussed in this survey and other papers that could not be discussed because of space
limitations. Importantly, analysis of works within our taxonomy uncovers knowledge gaps and
potential crossovers of methods between disciplines that can serve as ideas for future research.
, Vol. 1, No. 1, Article . Publication date: March 2020.

Physics-Guided Machine Learning Survey
23
Indeed, there are a myriad of opportunities for taking ideas across applications, objectives, and
methods, as well as bringing them back to the traditional ML discipline. For example, the physics-
guided NN approaches developed for aquatic sciences [121, 132] can be used in any application
where an imperfect mechanistic model is available. Raissi et al. [224] take physics-guided loss
function methods to solve PDEs and extend them to inverse modeling problems in fluid dynamics.
Furthermore, Daw et al. [68] develop a monotonicity-preserving architecture for lake temperature
based on previous work done using loss function terms and a hybrid physics-ML architecture [140].
As another example Jia et al. [133] use physics to inform the propagation of knowledge in a graph
neural network. Future research along this direction may shed light on the interpretability of hidden
variables in graph neural network models and also how to build dynamic graph structures based on
physics.
From Table 3, it is easy to see that several boxes are rather sparse or entirely empty, many
of which represent opportunities for future work. For example, ML models for parameterization
are increasingly being used in domains such as climate science and weather forecasting [153],
all of which can benefit from the integration of physical principles. Furthermore, principles from
super-resolution frameworks, originally developed in the context of computer vision applications,
are beginning to be applied to downscaling to create higher resolution climate predictions [273].
However, most of these do not incorporate physics (e.g., through additional loss function terms or an
informed design of architecture). The fact that nearly all of the other methods (columns) except for
hybrid modeling are applicable to this task shows that there is tremendous scope for new exploration,
where research pursued in these columns in the context of other objectives can be applied for this
objective. We also see a lot of opportunities for new research on physics-guided initialization, where,
for example, an ML algorithm could be pre-trained for inverse modeling.
Not all promising research directions are covered by Table 3 and the previous discussion. For
instance, one promising direction is to forecast future events using ML and continuously update
model states by incorporating ideas from data assimilation [137]. An instance of this is pursued by
Dua et al. [80] to build an ML model that predicts the parameters of a physical model using past time
series data as an input. Another instance of this approach is seen in epidemiology, where Magri et al.
[187] used a NN for data assimilation to predict a parameter vector that captures the time evolution of
a COVID-19 epidemiological model. Such approaches can benefit from the ideas in Section 3 (e.g.,
physics-based loss, intermediate physics variables, etc.). Another direction is to combine scientific
knowledge and machine learning to better inform human decisions on environmental or engineering
systems. For example, by using anticipated water temperature, one may build new reinforcement
learning algorithms to dynamically decide when and how much water to release from reservoirs to
a river network [131]. Similarly, such techniques for decision making can be used for automated
control in the power plant.
5
CONCLUDING REMARKS
Given the current deluge of sensor data and advances in ML methods, we envision that the merging
of principles from ML and physics will play an invaluable role in the future of scientific modeling to
address the pressing environmental and physical modeling problems facing society. The application-
centric objectives defined in Section 2 span the primary communities and disciplines that have
both contributed to and benefit from physics-ML integration in a significant way. We believe these
categories both provide perspective on the different ways of viewing the physics-ML integration
methodologies in Section 3 for different purposes and also allow for coverage of a variety of
disciplines that have been pursuing these ideas mostly-independently in recent years. Researchers
working in one of these objectives can see how their methods fit within the taxonomy and relate
, Vol. 1, No. 1, Article . Publication date: March 2020.

24
Jared Willard, Xiaowei Jia, Shaoming Xu, Michael Steinbach, and Vipin Kumar
Table 3. Table of literature classified by objective and method
Physics-Guided
Loss Function
(3.1)
Physics-Guided
Initialization
(3.2)
Physics-Guided
Architecture
(3.3)
Hybrid Model (3.4)
Residual (3.4.1)
Other (3.4.2-3.4.5)
Improve or
replace physical
model (2.1)
[266] [10] [219] [158]
[140] [182] [203] [76]
[86] [130] [174] [204]
[231] [313] [121] [125]
[187] [92] [306]
[180] [298] [184]
[267] [39] [247]
[133] [130]
[231] [298]
[173] [66] [24]
[255] [12] [17]
[203] [204] [213]
[239] [125]
[281] [214] [176]
[249] [310] [309]
[311] [245] [78]
[266] [297] [279]
[241] [278] [293]
[174] [19]
[109] [113] [240]
[117] [140] [253]
[60] [78] [179] [211]
[305] [312] [276]
[302] [111] [187]
[55] [36]
Parameterization (2.2)
[310] [32] [31] [306]
[28] [32] [312]
Downscaling (2.3)
[37] [134]
[201] [274]
Reduced Order
Models (2.4)
[209] [16] [167]
[138] [86] [210]
[138] [241] [242]
[278] [115] [210]
[67]
Solve
PDEs (2.5)
[226] [251] [301] [303]
[70] [196] [228] [248]
[318] [82] [102] [144]
[292] [216] [195]
[23] [90] [320] [154]
[58] [236] [53] [70]
[192] [252] [26] [61]
[149] [88] [299] [216]
[195] [225] [145]
[198] [171] [44]
[188]
Inverse
modeling
(2.6)
[224] [136]
[35] [89] [256]
[150]
[123]
[212] [117] [135] [257]
[48] [45] [79] [246]
Discover Governing
Equations (2.7)
[227] [178]
[270] [177] [62]
[169]
Data Generation
(2.8)
[72] [49] [37] [316]
[151] [292] [308]
[59] [296] [248]
Uncertainty
Quantification (2.9)
[290] [303] [288]
[304] [318] [102]
[298] [184]
[68] [300] [288]
[274]
[77]
them to how they are being used in other objectives. Our hope is that this survey will accelerate the
cross-pollination of ideas among these diverse research communities.
The discussion and structure provided in this survey also serve to benefit the ML community,
where, for example, techniques for adding physical constraints to loss functions can be used to enforce
fairness in predictive models, or realism for data generated by GANs. Further, novel architecture
designs can enable new ways to incorporate prior domain information (beyond what is usually done
using Bayesian frameworks) and can lead to better interpretability.
This survey focuses primarily on improving the modeling of engineering and environmental sys-
tems that are traditionally solved using mechanistic modeling. However, the general ideas discussed
here for integrating scientific knowledge in ML have wider applicability, and such research is already
being pursued in many other contexts. For example, there are several interesting works in system
control which often involves reinforcement learning techniques (e.g., combining model predictive
control with Gaussian processes in robotics [13], informed priors for neuroscience modeling [104],
physics-based reward functions in computational chemistry [63], and fluidic feedback control from a
cylinder [152]). Other examples include identifying features of interest in the output of computational
simulations of physics-based models (e.g., high-impact weather predictions [194], segmentation of
climate models [202], and tracking phenomena from climate model data [97, 237]). There is also
, Vol. 1, No. 1, Article . Publication date: March 2020.

Physics-Guided Machine Learning Survey
25
recent work on encoding domain knowledge in geometric deep learning [41, 50] that is finding in-
creasing use in computational chemistry [71, 81, 95], physics [25, 54], hydrology [133], geostatistics
[14, 294], and neuroscience [155]. We expect that there will be a lot of potential for cross-over of
ideas amongst these different efforts that will greatly expedite research in this nascent field.
REFERENCES
[1] 2019. ICERM Workshop on Scientific Machine Learning. https://icerm.brown.edu/events/ht19-1-sml/
[2] 2020. 1st Workshop on Knowledge Guided Machine Learning (KGML): A Framework for Accelerating Scientific
Discovery. https://sites.google.com/umn.edu/kgml/workshop
[3] 2020. AAAI Symposium on Physics-Guided AI. https://sites.google.com/vt.edu/pgai-aaai-20
[4] 2020.
IGARS 2020 Symposium on Incorporating Physics into Deep Learning.
https://igarss2020.org/Papers/
ViewSession_MS.asp?Sessionid=1016
[5] 2020. International Conference on Learning Representations 2020 Workshop on Integration of Deep Neural Models
and Differential Equations. https://openreview.net/group?id=ICLR.cc/2020/Workshop/DeepDiffEq
[6] 2021. AAAI Spring Symposium on Combining Artificial Intelligence and Machine Learning with Physics Sciences.
https://sites.google.com/view/aaai-mlps
[7] S Aditya, Y Yang, and C Baral. 2019. Integrating knowledge and reasoning in image understanding. arXiv:1906.09954
(2019).
[8] M Alber et al. 2019. Integrating machine learning and multiscale modeling—perspectives, challenges, and opportunities
in the biological, biomedical, and behavioral sciences. NPJ Digit. Med. 2, 1 (2019), 1–11.
[9] B Alipanahi et al. 2015. Predicting the sequence specificities of DNA-and RNA-binding proteins by deep learning.
Nature biotechnology 33, 8 (2015), 831–838.
[10] M. Alvarez et al. 2009. Latent force models. In Artificial Intelligence and Statistics. 9–16.
[11] D Amsallem and C Farhat. 2008. Interpolation method for adapting reduced-order models and application to aeroelasti-
city. AIAA journal 46, 7 (2008), 1803–1813.
[12] B Anderson, TS Hy, and R Kondor. 2019. Cormorant: Covariant molecular neural networks. In Adv. Neural Inf. Process.
Syst. 14510–14519.
[13] O Andersson, F Heintz, and P Doherty. 2015. Model-based reinforcement learning in continuous environments using
real-time constrained optimization. In AAAI.
[14] G Appleby, L Liu, and L Liu. 2020. Kriging Convolutional Networks.. In AAAI. 3187–3194.
[15] L Arsenault et al. 2014. Machine learning for many-body physics: The case of the Anderson impurity model. Phys.
Rev. B (2014).
[16] O Azencot et al. 2020. Forecasting Sequential Data using Consistent Koopman Autoencoders. arXiv:2003.02236
(2020).
[17] Y Ba et al. 2019. Physics-based neural networks for shape from polarization. arXiv:1903.10210 (2019).
[18] Y Ba, G Zhao, and A Kadambi. 2019. Blending diverse physical priors with neural networks. arXiv:1910.00201
(2019).
[19] M Bahari, I Nejjar, and A Alahi. 2021. Injecting knowledge in data-driven vehicle trajectory predictors. Transp. Res.
Part C Emerg. 128 (2021), 103010.
[20] B Baker et al. 2016. Designing neural network architectures using reinforcement learning. arXiv:1611.02167 (2016).
[21] N Baker et al. 2019. Workshop report on basic research needs for scientific machine learning: Core technologies for
artificial intelligence. Technical Report. USDOE Office of Science.
[22] P Baldi et al. 2016. Jet substructure classification in high-energy physics with deep neural networks. Phys. Rev. D 93, 9
(2016), 094034.
[23] Y Bar-Sinai et al. 2019. Learning data-driven discretizations for partial differential equations. PNAS 116, 31 (2019),
15344–15349.
[24] E Baseman et al. 2018. Physics-Informed Machine Learning for DRAM Error Modeling. In IEEE DFT.
[25] P Battaglia et al. 2016. Interaction networks for learning about objects, relations and physics. In Adv. Neural Inf.
Process. Syst. 4502–4510.
[26] C Beck, E Weinan, and A Jentzen. 2019. Machine learning approximation algorithms for high-dimensional fully
nonlinear partial differential equations and second-order backward stochastic differential equations. J Nonlinear Sci.
29, 4 (2019), 1563–1619.
[27] J Behler. 2011. Neural network potential-energy surfaces in chemistry: a tool for large-scale simulations. Phys. Chem
13, 40 (2011), 17930–17955.
[28] J Behler and M Parrinello. 2007. Generalized neural-network representation of high-dimensional potential-energy
surfaces. Phys. Rev. Lett. 98, 14 (2007), 146401.
, Vol. 1, No. 1, Article . Publication date: March 2020.

26
Jared Willard, Xiaowei Jia, Shaoming Xu, Michael Steinbach, and Vipin Kumar
[29] A Bennett and B Nijssen. 2020. Deep learned process parameterizations provide better representations of turbulent
heat fluxes in hydrologic models. Water Resour. Res. (2020), e2020WR029328.
[30] Karianne J Bergen et al. 2019. Machine learning for data-driven discovery in solid Earth geoscience. Science 363,
6433 (2019), eaau0323.
[31] P Beucler et al. 2019.
Achieving conservation of energy in neural network emulators for climate modeling.
arXiv:1906.06622 (2019).
[32] T Beucler et al. 2019.
Enforcing Analytic Constraints in Neural-Networks Emulating Physical Systems.
arXiv:1909.00912 (2019).
[33] G Beylkin, R Coifman, and V Rokhlin. 1991. Fast wavelet transforms and numerical algorithms I. Commun. Pure
Appl. Math. 44, 2 (1991), 141–183.
[34] I Bilionis and N Zabaras. 2012. Multi-output local Gaussian process regression: Applications to uncertainty quantifica-
tion. J. Comput. Phys (2012).
[35] R Biswas et al. 2019. Prestack and poststack inversion using a physics-guided convolutional neural network. Interpret-
ation 7, 3 (2019), SE161–SE174.
[36] SS Blakseth et al. 2022. Deep neural network enabled corrective source term approach to hybrid analysis and modeling.
Neural Netw 146 (2022), 181–199.
[37] M Bode et al. 2021. Using physics-informed enhanced super-resolution generative adversarial networks for subfilter
modeling in turbulent reactive flows. Proc Combust Inst. (2021).
[38] J Bongard and H Lipson. 2007. Automated reverse engineering of nonlinear dynamical systems. PNAS (2007).
https://doi.org/10.1073/pnas.0609476104
[39] K others Bousmalis. 2018. Using simulation and domain adaptation to improve efficiency of deep robotic grasping. In
IEEE ICRA. IEEE, 4243–4250.
[40] ND Brenowitz and CS Bretherton. 2018. Prognostic validation of a neural network unified physics parameterization.
Geophys. Res. Lett. 45, 12 (2018), 6289–6298.
[41] MM Bronstein et al. 2017. Geometric deep learning: going beyond euclidean data. IEEE Signal Process. Mag. 34, 4
(2017), 18–42.
[42] S Brunton et al. 2017. Koopman operator theory: Past, present, and future. APS (2017), L27–004.
[43] S Brunton, J Proctor, and J Kutz. 2016. Discovering governing equations from data by sparse identification of nonlinear
dynamical systems. PNAS (2016).
[44] J Bu and A Karpatne. 2021. Quadratic residual networks: A new class of neural networks for solving forward and
inverse problems in physics involving pdes. In SDM. SIAM, 675–683.
[45] T A Bubba et al. 2019. Learning the invisible: A hybrid deep learning-shearlet framework for limited angle computed
tomography. Inverse Probl. (2019).
[46] S Cai et al. 2021. Physics-informed neural networks (PINNs) for fluid mechanics: A review. arXiv:2105.09506 (2021).
[47] PM Caldwell et al. 2014. Statistical significance of climate sensitivity predictors obtained by data mining. Geophys.
Res. Let. 41, 5 (2014), 1803–1808.
[48] G Camps-Valls et al. 2018. Physics-aware Gaussian processes in remote sensing. Appl. Soft Comput. 68 (2018), 69–82.
[49] R Cang, H Li, H Yao, Y Jiao, and Y Ren. 2018. Improving direct physical properties prediction of heterogeneous ma-
terials from imaging data via convolutional neural network and a morphology-aware generative model. Computational
Materials Science 150 (2018), 212–221.
[50] W Cao et al. 2020. A comprehensive survey on geometric deep learning. IEEE Access 8 (2020), 35929–35949.
[51] G Carleo and M Troyer. 2017. Solving the quantum many-body problem with artificial neural networks. Science 355,
6325 (2017), 602–606.
[52] S Chan and A Elsheikh. 2017. Parametrization and generation of geological models with generative adversarial
networks. arXiv:1708.01810 (2017).
[53] B Chang et al. 2019. AntisymmetricRNN: A dynamical system view on recurrent neural networks. arXiv:1902.09689
(2019).
[54] MB Chang et al. 2016. A compositional object-based approach to learning physical dynamics. arXiv:1612.00341
(2016).
[55] MA Chao et al. 2022. Fusing physics-based and deep learning models for prognostics. Reliab. Eng. Syst. Saf. 217
(2022), 107961.
[56] G Chen et al. 2012. Support-vector-machine-based reduced-order model for limit cycle oscillation prediction of
nonlinear aeroelastic system. Math. Probl. Eng 2012 (2012).
[57] H Chen et al. 2017. Low-dose CT with a residual encoder-decoder convolutional neural network. IEEE T-MI (2017).
[58] TQ Chen et al. 2018. Neural ordinary differential equations. In NIPS.
[59] W Chen and M Fuge. 2018. BezierGAN: Automatic Generation of Smooth Curves from Interpretable Low-Dimensional
Parameters. arXiv:1808.08871 (2018).
, Vol. 1, No. 1, Article . Publication date: March 2020.

Physics-Guided Machine Learning Survey
27
[60] X Chen et al. 2018. Pga: Physics guided and adaptive approach for mobile fine-grained air pollution estimation. In
Ubicomp.
[61] Z Chen et al. 2019. Symplectic Recurrent Neural Networks. arXiv:1909.13334 (2019).
[62] Z Chen, Y Liu, and H Sun. 2020. Deep learning of physical laws from scarce data. arXiv:2005.03448 (2020).
[63] Y Cho et al. 2019. Physics-guided reinforcement learning for 3D molecular structures. In NeurIPS.
[64] A Choudhary et al. 2019. Physics enhanced neural networks predict order and chaos. arXiv:1912.01958 (2019).
[65] M Christie, V Demyanov, and D Erbas. 2006. Uncertainty quantification for porous media flows. J. Comput. Phys
(2006).
[66] TS Cohen et al. 2018. Spherical cnns. arXiv:1801.10130 (2018).
[67] T Daniel et al. 2020. Model order reduction assisted by deep neural networks (ROM-net). Adv. Model. Simul. Eng. 7
(2020), 1–27.
[68] A Daw et al. 2019. Physics-Guided Architecture (PGA) of Neural Networks for Quantifying Uncertainty in Lake
Temperature Modeling. arXiv:1911.02682 (2019).
[69] MS Dawson et al. 1992. Inversion of surface parameters using fast learning neural networks. IGARSS Symposium
(1992).
[70] E de Bezenac, A Pajot, and P Gallinari. 2019. Deep learning for physical processes: Incorporating prior scientific
knowledge. J. Stat. Mech.: Theory Exp 2019, 12 (2019), 124009.
[71] Nicola De Cao and Thomas Kipf. 2018.
MolGAN: An implicit generative model for small molecular graphs.
arXiv:1805.11973 (2018).
[72] L de Oliveira, M Paganini, and B Nachman. 2017. Learning particle physics by example: location-aware generative
adversarial networks for physics synthesis. Comput. Softw. Big Sci (2017).
[73] EL Denton et al. 2015. Deep generative image models using a laplacian pyramid of adversarial networks. In NIPS.
[74] C Deser, A Phillips, V Bourdette, and H Teng. 2012. Uncertainty in climate change projections: the role of internal
variability. Climate dynamics (2012).
[75] MWMG Dissanayake and N Phan-Thien. 1994. Neural-network-based approximations for solving partial differential
equations. Commun. Numer. Methods Eng. 10, 3 (1994), 195–201.
[76] NAK Doan, W Polifke, and L Magri. 2019. Physics-informed echo state networks for chaotic systems forecasting. In
ICCS. Springer.
[77] B Dong, Z Li, SMM Rahman, and R Vega. 2016. A hybrid model approach for forecasting future residential electricity
consumption. Energy Build. (2016).
[78] Arinan D Dourado and Felipe Viana. 2020. Physics-Informed Neural Networks for Bias Compensation in Corrosion-
Fatigue. In AIAA Forum. 1149.
[79] JE Downton and DP Hampson. 2019.
Use of theory-guided neural networks to perform seismic inversion. In
GeoSoftware, CGG.
[80] V Dua. 2011. An artificial neural network approximation based decomposition approach for parameter estimation of
system of ordinary differential equations. Comput. Chem. Eng. 35, 3 (2011), 545–553.
[81] DK Duvenaud et al. 2015. Convolutional networks on graphs for learning molecular fingerprints. In Adv. Neural Inf.
Process. Syst. 2224–2232.
[82] V Dwivedi and B Srinivasan. 2020. Solution of Biharmonic Equation in Complicated Geometries with Physics
Informed Extreme Learning Machine. J. Comput. Inf. Sci. Eng. (2020), 1–10.
[83] S Džeroski et al. 1999. Equation discovery with ecological applications. In Machine learning methods for ecological
applications. Springer, 185–207.
[84] I Ebert-Uphoff et al. 2021. CIRA Guide to Custom Loss Functions for Neural Networks in Environmental Sciences–
Version 1. arXiv:2106.09757 (2021).
[85] T Elsken, JH Metzen, and F Hutter. 2018. Neural architecture search: A survey. arXiv:1808.05377 (2018).
[86] NB Erichson, M Muehlebach, and MW Mahoney. 2019. Physics-informed autoencoders for lyapunov-stable fluid flow
prediction. arXiv:1905.10866 (2019).
[87] JH Faghmous and V Kumar. 2014. A big data guide to understanding climate change: The case for theory-guided data
science. Big data 2, 3 (2014), 155–163.
[88] Y Fan et al. 2019. A multiscale neural network based on hierarchical matrices. Multiscale Model Simul. 17, 4 (2019),
1189–1213.
[89] Y Fan and L Ying. 2020. Solving electrical impedance tomography with deep learning. J. Comput. Phys 404 (2020),
109119.
[90] Z Fang. 2021. A High-Efficient Hybrid Physics-Informed Neural Networks Based on Convolutional Neural Network.
IEEE Trans Neural Netw Learn Syst. (2021).
[91] AB Farimani, J Gomes, and VS Pande. 2017. Deep learning the physics of transport phenomena. arXiv:1709.02432
(2017).
, Vol. 1, No. 1, Article . Publication date: March 2020.

28
Jared Willard, Xiaowei Jia, Shaoming Xu, Michael Steinbach, and Vipin Kumar
[92] F Fioretto, TWK Mak, and T Van Hentenryck. 2020. Predicting AC optimal power flows: Combining deep learning
and lagrangian dual methods. In AAAI, Vol. 34. 630–637.
[93] J Fish and T Belytschko. 2007. A first course in finite elements. Wiley.
[94] U Forssell and P Lindskog. 1997. Combining Semi-Physical and Neural Network Modeling: An Example ofIts
Usefulness. IFAC Proceedings Volumes 30, 11 (1997), 767–770.
[95] Alex Fout et al. 2017. Protein interface prediction using graph convolutional networks. In Adv. Neural Inf. Process.
Syst. 6530–6539.
[96] M Frangos et al. 2010. Surrogate and reduced-order modeling: A comparison of approaches for large-scale statistical
inverse problems. Large-scale inverse problems and quantification of uncertainty 123149 (2010).
[97] DJ Gagne et al. 2017. Storm-based probabilistic hail forecasting with machine learning applied to convection-allowing
ensembles. Weather Forecast. 32, 5 (2017), 1819–1840.
[98] Y Gal and Z Ghahramani. 2016. Dropout as a bayesian approximation: Representing model uncertainty in deep
learning. In ICML.
[99] D Galbally et al. 2010. Non-linear model reduction for uncertainty quantification in large-scale inverse problems. Int. J.
Numer. Methods Fluids (2010).
[100] AR Ganguly et al. 2014. Toward enhanced understanding and projections of climate extremes using physics-guided
data mining techniques. Nonlinear Process. Geophys 21, 4 (2014), 777–795.
[101] P Gao et al. 2008. Gaussian process modelling of latent chemical species: applications to inferring transcription factor
activities. Bioinformatics 24, 16 (2008), i70–i75.
[102] N Geneva and N Zabaras. 2020. Modeling the dynamics of PDE systems with physics-constrained deep auto-regressive
networks. J. Comput. Phys (2020).
[103] P Gentine et al. 2018. Could machine learning break the convection parameterization deadlock? Geophys. Res. Lett
(2018).
[104] SJ Gershman. 2016. Empirical priors for reinforcement learning models. J. Math. Psychol. 71 (2016), 1–6.
[105] D Gerwin. 1974. Information processing, data inferences, and scientific generalization. Behavioral Science 19, 5
(1974), 314–325.
[106] H Ghorbanidehno et al. 2020. Recent developments in fast and scalable inverse modeling and data assimilation methods
in hydrology. J. Hydrol. (2020), 125266.
[107] D Giannakis, J Slawinska, and Z Zhao. 2015. Spatiotemporal feature extraction with data-driven Koopman operators.
In Feature Extraction: Modern Questions and Challenges. 103–115.
[108] A Glielmo, P Sollich, and A De Vita. 2017. Accurate interatomic force fields via machine learning with covariant
kernels. Phys. Rev. B 95, 21 (2017), 214302.
[109] EB Goldstein, G Coco, AB Murray, and MO Green. 2014. Data-driven components in a model of inner-shelf sorted
bedforms: a new hybrid model. Earth Surf. Dyn. (2014).
[110] GH Golub and CF Van Loan. 2012. Matrix computations. Vol. 3. JHU press.
[111] NP Greis et al. 2020. Physics-guided machine learning for self-aware machining. In AAAI Symposium – AI and
Manufacturing.
[112] S Greydanus, M Dzamba, and J Yosinski. 2019. Hamiltonian neural networks. In NIPS.
[113] A Grover et al. 2015. A deep hybrid model for weather forecasting. In ACM SIGKDD. 379–386.
[114] J Guo et al. 2018. Long text generation via adversarial training with leaked information. In AAAI.
[115] M Guo and JS Hesthaven. 2019. Data-driven reduced order modeling for time-dependent problems. Comput. Methods
Appl. Mech. Eng. 345 (2019), 75–99.
[116] HV Gupta et al. 2014. Debates—The future of hydrological sciences: A (common) path forward? Using models and
data to learn: A systems theoretic perspective on the future of hydrological science. Water Resour. Res. (2014).
[117] F Hamilton et al. 2017. Hybrid modeling and prediction of dynamical systems. PLOS Comput. Biol (2017).
[118] J Han, A Jentzen, and E Weinan. 2018. Solving high-dimensional partial differential equations using deep learning.
PNAS (2018).
[119] J Han, L Zhang, and E Weinan. 2019. Solving many-electron Schrödinger equation using deep neural networks. J.
Comput. Phys 399 (2019), 108929.
[120] K Hansen et al. 2013. Assessment and validation of machine learning methods for predicting molecular atomization
energies. J. Chem. Theory Comput 9, 8 (2013), 3404–3419.
[121] PC Hanson et al. 2020. Predicting lake surface water phosphorus dynamics using process-guided machine learning.
Ecol Modell 430 (2020), 109136.
[122] K He, X Zhang, S Ren, and J Sun. 2016. Deep residual learning for image recognition. In CVPR.
[123] JR Holland et al. 2019. Field inversion and machine learning with embedded neural networks: Physics-consistent
neural network training. In AIAA Forum. 3200.
, Vol. 1, No. 1, Article . Publication date: March 2020.

Physics-Guided Machine Learning Survey
29
[124] WW Hsieh. 2009. Machine learning methods in the environmental sciences: Neural networks and kernels. Cambridge
university press.
[125] X Hu et al. 2020. Physics-Guided Deep Neural Networks for PowerFlow Analysis. arXiv:2002.00097 (2020).
[126] F Hutter, L Kotthoff, and J Vanschoren. 2019. Automated machine learning: methods, systems, challenges. Springer
Nature.
[127] G Ibarra-Berastegi et al. 2015. Short-term forecasting of the wave energy flux: Analogues, random forests, and
physics-based models. Ocean Eng. 104 (2015), 530–539.
[128] Z Ivezi´c et al. 2019. Statistics, data mining, and machine learning in astronomy: a practical Python guide for the
analysis of survey data. Princeton University Press.
[129] X Jia et al. 2019. Bringing automated, remote-sensed, machine learning methods to monitoring crop landscapes at
scale. Agric Econ 50 (2019), 41–50.
[130] X Jia et al. 2019. Physics Guided RNNs for Modeling Dynamical Systems: A Case Study in Simulating Lake
Temperature Profiles. In SDM. SIAM.
[131] X Jia et al. 2021. Graph-based reinforcement learning for active learning in real time: An application in modeling river
networks. In SDM. SIAM, 621–629.
[132] X Jia et al. 2021. Physics-guided machine learning for scientific discovery: An application in simulating lake
temperature profiles. ACM/IMS J. of Data Sci. 2, 3 (2021), 1–26.
[133] X Jia et al. 2021. Physics-Guided Recurrent Graph Model for Predicting Flow and Temperature in River Networks. In
SDM. SIAM, 612–620.
[134] CM Jiang et al. 2020. Meshfreeflownet: A physics-constrained deep continuous space-time super-resolution framework.
arXiv:2005.01463 (2020).
[135] KH Jin et al. 2017. Deep convolutional neural network for inverse problems in imaging. IEEE Trans. Image Process
(2017).
[136] A Kahana et al. 2020. Obstacle segmentation based on the wave equation and deep learning. J. Comput. Phys (2020),
109458.
[137] E Kalnay. 2003. Atmospheric modeling, data assimilation and predictability. Cambridge university press.
[138] J Kani and A Elsheikh. 2017.
DR-RNN: A deep residual recurrent neural network for model reduction.
arXiv:1709.00939 (2017).
[139] George Em Karniadakis, Ioannis G Kevrekidis, Lu Lu, Paris Perdikaris, Sifan Wang, and Liu Yang. 2021. Physics-
informed machine learning. Nature Reviews Physics 3, 6 (2021), 422–440.
[140] A Karpatne et al. 2017. Physics-guided neural networks (PGNN): An application in lake temperature modeling.
arXiv:1710.11431 (2017).
[141] A Karpatne et al. 2017. Theory-guided data science: A new paradigm for scientific discovery from data. IEEE TKDE
(2017).
[142] A Karpatne et al. 2018. Machine learning for the geosciences: Challenges and opportunities. IEEE TKDE (2018).
[143] A Karpatne, N Ramakrishnan, and V Kumar (Eds.). 2022. Knowledge-guided machine learning: Accelerating discovery
using scientific knowledge and data. CRC Press.
[144] S Karumuri et al. 2020. Simulator-free solution of high-dimensional stochastic elliptic partial differential equations
using deep neural networks. J. Comput. Phys (2020).
[145] K Kashinath et al. 2020. Enforcing physical constraints in cnns through differentiable pde layer. In ICLR Workshop on
Integration of Deep Neural Models and Differential Equations.
[146] K Kashinath et al. 2021. Physics-informed machine learning: case studies for weather and climate modelling. Philos.
Trans. R. Soc. A 379, 2194 (2021), 20200093.
[147] MF Kasim et al. 2020. Building high accuracy emulators for scientific simulations with deep neural architecture search.
arXiv e-prints (2020), arXiv–2001.
[148] SK Kauwe et al. 2018. Machine learning prediction of heat capacity for solid inorganics. Integr. Mater. Manuf. Innov.
7, 2 (2018), 43–51.
[149] Y Khoo, J Lu, and L Ying. 2019. Solving for high-dimensional committor functions using artificial neural networks.
Res. Math. Sci 6, 1 (2019), 1.
[150] Y Khoo and L Ying. 2019. SwitchNet: a neural network model for forward and inverse scattering problems. SIAM J
Sci Comput 41, 5 (2019), A3182–A3201.
[151] B Kim et al. 2019. Deep fluids: A generative network for parameterized fluid simulations. In Computer Graphics
Forum, Vol. 38. Wiley Online Library, 59–70.
[152] H Koizumi, S Tsutsumi, and E Shima. 2018. Feedback control of Karman vortex shedding from a cylinder using deep
reinforcement learning. In Flow Control Conference. 3691.
[153] VM Krasnopolsky and MS Fox-Rabinovitz. 2006. Complex hybrid models combining deterministic and machine
learning components for numerical climate modeling and weather prediction. Neural Netw 19, 2 (2006), 122–134.
, Vol. 1, No. 1, Article . Publication date: March 2020.

30
Jared Willard, Xiaowei Jia, Shaoming Xu, Michael Steinbach, and Vipin Kumar
[154] A Krishnapriyan et al. 2021. Characterizing possible failure modes in physics-informed neural networks. Adv. Neural
Inf. Process. Syst. 34 (2021).
[155] SI Ktena et al. 2017. Distance metric learning using graph convolutional networks: Application to functional brain
networks. In MICCAI. Springer, 469–477.
[156] S Kumar et al. 2020. Inverse-designed spinodoid metamaterials. Npj Comput. Mater. 6, 1 (2020), 1–10.
[157] NJ Kutz. 2017. Deep learning in fluid dynamics. J. Fluid Mech. 814 (2017), 1–4.
[158] L Ladick`y et al. 2015. Data-driven fluid simulations using regression forests. ACM Trans. Graph 34, 6 (2015), 1–9.
[159] IE Lagaris, A Likas, and DI Fotiadis. 1998. Artificial neural networks for solving ordinary and partial differential
equations. IEEE Trans. Neural Netw. Learn (1998).
[160] JH Lagergren et al. 2020. Learning partial differential equations for biological transport models from noisy spatio-
temporal data. Proc. R. Soc A 476, 2234 (2020), 20190800.
[161] B Lakshminarayanan, A Pritzel, and C Blundell. 2017. Simple and scalable predictive uncertainty estimation using
deep ensembles. In NIPS.
[162] P Langley. 1981. Data-driven discovery of physical laws. Cogn. Sci. 5, 1 (1981), 31–54.
[163] P Langley, GL Bradshaw, and HA Simon. 1983. Rediscovering chemistry with the BACON system. In Machine
learning. Springer, 307–329.
[164] T Lassila et al. 2014. Model order reduction in fluid dynamics: challenges and perspectives. In Reduced Order Methods
for modeling and computational reduction. Springer, 235–273.
[165] ND Lawrence, G Sanguinetti, and M Rattray. 2007. Modelling transcriptional regulation using Gaussian processes. In
Adv. Neural Inf. Process. Syst. 785–792.
[166] D Lazer et al. 2014. The parable of Google Flu: traps in big data analysis. Science (2014).
[167] K Lee and KT Carlberg. 2020. Model reduction of dynamical systems on nonlinear manifolds using deep convolutional
autoencoders. J. Comput. Phys. 404 (2020), 108973.
[168] DB Lenat. 1983. The role of heuristics in learning by discovery: Three case studies. In Machine learning. Springer,
243–306.
[169] H Li and Y Weng. 2021. Physical Equation Discovery Using Physics-Consistent Neural Network (PCNN) Under
Incomplete Observability. In ACM SIGKDD. 925–933.
[170] Q Li et al. 2017. Extended dynamic mode decomposition with dictionary learning: A data-driven adaptive spectral
decomposition of the Koopman operator. Chaos 27, 10 (2017), 103111.
[171] Z Li et al. 2020. Fourier neural operator for parametric partial differential equations. arXiv:2010.08895 (2020).
[172] TW Liao and G Li. 2020. Metaheuristic-based inverse design of materials–A survey. J Materiomics (2020).
[173] J Ling, A Kurzawski, and J Templeton. 2016. Reynolds averaged turbulence modelling using deep neural networks
with embedded invariance. J. Fluid Mech (2016).
[174] D Liu and Y Wang. 2019. Multi-Fidelity Physics-Constrained Neural Network and Its Application in Materials
Modeling. J. Mech. Des. 141, 12 (2019).
[175] L Liu et al. 2021. Anatomy-aided deep learning for medical image segmentation: a review. Phys. Med. Biol (2021).
[176] Y Liu et al. 2020. Multiresolution Convolutional Autoencoders. arXiv:2004.04946 (2020).
[177] Z Liu and M Tegmark. 2021. Machine Learning Conservation Laws from Trajectories. Phys. Rev. Lett. 126, 18 (2021),
180604.
[178] JC Loiseau and SL Brunton. 2018. Constrained sparse Galerkin regression. J. Fluid Mech. 838 (2018), 42–67.
[179] Y Long, X She, and S Mukhopadhyay. 2018. HybridNet: integrating model-based and data-driven learning to predict
evolution of dynamical systems. arXiv:1806.07439 (2018).
[180] Junde Lu and Furong Gao. 2008. Model migration with inclusive similarity for development of a new process model.
Ind. Eng. Chem. Res 47, 23 (2008), 9508–9516.
[181] J Lu, K Yao, and F Gao. 2009. Process similarity and developing new process models through migration. AIChE
journal 55, 9 (2009), 2318–2328.
[182] D Luengo, M Campos-Taberner, and G Camps-Valls. 2016. Latent force models for earth observation time series
prediction. In IEEE Int. Workshop Mach. Learn.). IEEE, 1–6.
[183] S Lunz, O Öktem, and CB Schönlieb. 2018. Adversarial regularizers in inverse problems. In NIPS.
[184] L Luo, Y Yao, and F Gao. 2015. Bayesian improved model migration methodology for fast process modeling by
incorporating prior information. Chem. Eng. Sci. 134 (2015), 23–35.
[185] B Lusch, NJ Kutz, and SL Brunton. 2018. Deep learning for universal linear embeddings of nonlinear dynamics. Nat.
Commun. 9, 1 (2018), 4950.
[186] D JC MacKay. 1992. A practical Bayesian framework for backpropagation networks. Neural computation (1992).
[187] L Magri and NAK Doan. 2020. First-principles machine learning modelling of COVID-19. arXiv:2004.09478 (2020).
[188] A Malek and R Shekari Beidokhti. 2006. Numerical solution for high order differential equations using a hybrid neural
network—optimization method. Appl. Math. Comput. 183, 1 (2006), 260–271.
, Vol. 1, No. 1, Article . Publication date: March 2020.

Physics-Guided Machine Learning Survey
31
[189] A Manzoni, S Pagani, and T Lassila. 2016. Accurate solution of Bayesian inverse uncertainty quantification problems
combining reduced basis methods and reduction error models. SIAM/ASA JUQ (2016).
[190] G Marcus and E Davis. 2014. Eight (no, Nine!) Problems with big data. The New York Times 6, 04 (2014), 2014.
[191] A Mardt et al. 2018. VAMPnets for deep learning of molecular kinetics. Nat. Commun. 9, 1 (2018), 1–11.
[192] Marios Mattheakis et al. 2019. Physical symmetries embedded in neural networks. arXiv:1904.08991 (2019).
[193] MT McCann, KH Jin, and M Unser. 2017. A review of convolutional neural networks for inverse problems in imaging.
arXiv:1710.04011 (2017).
[194] A McGovern et al. 2017. Using artificial intelligence to improve real-time decision-making for high-impact weather.
Bull. Amer. Meteor. 98, 10 (2017), 2073–2090.
[195] Xuhui Meng and George Em Karniadakis. 2020. A composite neural network that learns from multi-fidelity data:
Application to function approximation and inverse PDE problems. J. Comput. Phys 401 (2020), 109020.
[196] X Meng, Z Li, D Zhang, and GE Karniadakis. 2019. Ppinn: Parareal physics-informed neural network for time-
dependent pdes. arXiv:1909.10145 (2019).
[197] I Mezi´c. 2005. Spectral properties of dynamical systems, model reduction and decompositions. Nonlinear Dyn. 41, 1-3
(2005), 309–325.
[198] AT Mohan et al. 2020. Embedding hard physical constraints in convolutional neural networks for 3D turbulence. In
ICLR 2020 Workshop on Integration of Deep Neural Models and Differential Equations.
[199] AT Mohan and DV Gaitonde. 2018. A deep learning based approach to reduced order modeling for turbulent flow
control using LSTM neural networks. arXiv:1804.09269 (2018).
[200] J Morton, FD Witherden, and MJ Kochenderfer. 2019.
Deep variational koopman models: Inferring koopman
observations for uncertainty-aware dynamics modeling and control. arXiv:1902.09742 (2019).
[201] B Mu et al. 2020. A Climate Downscaling Deep Learning Model considering the Multiscale Spatial Correlations and
Chaos of Meteorological Events. Math. Probl. Eng 2020 (2020).
[202] M Mudigonda et al. 2017. Segmenting and tracking extreme climate events using neural networks. In Deep Learning
for Physical Sciences (DLPS) Workshop in NIPS Conference.
[203] N Muralidhar et al. 2018. Incorporating prior domain knowledge into deep neural networks. In IEEE Big Data. IEEE.
[204] N Muralidhar et al. 2020. PhyNet: Physics Guided Neural Networks for Particle Drag Force Prediction in Assembly. In
SDM. SIAM, 559–567.
[205] F Noé et al. 2020. Machine learning for molecular simulation. Annu. Rev. Phys. Chem. 71 (2020), 361–390.
[206] P Nowack et al. 2018. Using machine learning to build temperature-based ozone parameterizations for climate
sensitivity simulations. Environ. Res. Lett. 13, 10 (2018), 104016.
[207] PA O’Gorman and JG Dwyer. 2018. Using machine learning to parameterize moist convection: Potential for modeling
of climate, climate change, and extreme events. J. Adv. Model. Earth Syst. 10, 10 (2018), 2548–2563.
[208] A Oord et al. 2016. Wavenet: A generative model for raw audio. arXiv:1609.03499 (2016).
[209] SE Otto and CW Rowley. 2019. Linearly recurrent autoencoder networks for learning dynamics. SIADS 18, 1 (2019),
558–593.
[210] S Pan and K Duraisamy. 2020. Physics-informed probabilistic learning of linear embeddings of nonlinear dynamics
with guaranteed stability. SIADS 19, 1 (2020), 480–509.
[211] R Paolucci et al. 2018. Broadband ground motions from 3D physics-based numerical simulations using artificial neural
networks. BSSA (2018).
[212] EJ Parish and K Duraisamy. 2016. A paradigm for data-driven predictive modeling using field inversion and machine
learning. J. Comput. Phys (2016).
[213] J Park and J Park. 2019. Physics-induced graph neural network: An application to wind-farm power estimation. Energy
187 (2019), 115883.
[214] S Pawar et al. 2021. Physics guided machine learning using simplified theories. Phys. Fluids 33, 1 (2021), 011701.
[215] GCY Peng et al. 2021. Multiscale modeling meets machine learning: What can we learn? Arch. Comput. Methods Eng.
28, 3 (2021), 1017–1037.
[216] W Peng et al. 2020. Accelerating Physics-Informed Neural Network Training with Prior Dictionaries. arXiv:2004.08151
(2020).
[217] CL Pettit. 2004. Uncertainty quantification in aeroelasticity: recent results and research challenges. J. of Aircraft
(2004).
[218] L Pilozzi et al. 2018. Machine learning inverse problem for topological photonics. Commun. Phys (2018).
[219] A Pukrittayakamee et al. 2009. Simultaneous fitting of a potential-energy surface and its corresponding force fields
using feedforward neural networks. J. Chem. Phys (2009).
[220] M Quade et al. 2018. Sparse identification of nonlinear dynamics for rapid model recovery. Chaos 28, 6 (2018),
063116.
[221] A Quarteroni et al. 2014. Reduced order methods for modeling and computational reduction. Vol. 9. Springer.
, Vol. 1, No. 1, Article . Publication date: March 2020.

32
Jared Willard, Xiaowei Jia, Shaoming Xu, Michael Steinbach, and Vipin Kumar
[222] P Raccuglia et al. 2016. Machine-learning-assisted materials discovery using failed experiments. Nature 533, 7601
(2016), 73–76.
[223] R Rai and CK Sahu. 2020. Driven by data or derived through physics? A Review of hybrid physics guided machine
learning techniques with cyber-physical system (CPS) focus. IEEE Access 8 (2020), 71050–71073.
[224] M Raissi et al. 2019. Deep learning of vortex-induced vibrations. J. Fluid Mech (2019).
[225] M Raissi and GE Karniadakis. 2018. Hidden physics models: Machine learning of nonlinear partial differential
equations. J. Comput. Phys 357 (2018), 125–141.
[226] M Raissi, P Perdikaris, and G Karniadakis. 2017. Physics informed deep learning (part i): Data-driven solutions of
nonlinear partial differential equations. arXiv:1711.10561 (2017).
[227] M Raissi, P Perdikaris, and G Karniadakis. 2017. Physics informed deep learning (part II): Data-driven discovery of
nonlinear partial differential equations. arXiv:1711.10561 (2017).
[228] M Raissi, P Perdikaris, and GE Karniadakis. 2019. Physics-informed neural networks: A deep learning framework for
solving forward and inverse problems involving nonlinear partial differential equations. J. Comput. Phys (2019).
[229] MM Rajabi and H Ketabchi. 2017. Uncertainty-based simulation-optimization using Gaussian process emulation:
application to coastal groundwater management. J. Hydrol (2017).
[230] S Rasp, MS Pritchard, and P Gentine. 2018. Deep learning to represent subgrid processes in climate models. PNAS
115, 39 (2018), 9684–9689.
[231] JS Read et al. 2019. Process-guided deep learning predictions of lake water temperature. Water Resour. Res. (2019).
[232] M Reichstein et al. 2019. Deep learning and process understanding for data-driven Earth system science. Nature 566,
7743 (2019), 195–204.
[233] K Rudd and S Ferrari. 2015. A constrained integration (CINT) approach to solving partial differential equations using
artificial neural networks. Neurocomputing (2015).
[234] SH Rudy et al. 2017. Data-driven discovery of partial differential equations. Science Advances (2017).
[235] Samuel H Rudy, J Nathan Kutz, and Steven L Brunton. 2019. Deep learning of dynamics and signal-noise decomposition
with time-stepping constraints. J. Comput. Phys 396 (2019), 483–506.
[236] L Ruthotto and E Haber. 2018. Deep neural networks motivated by partial differential equations. J. Math. Imaging Vis.
(2018).
[237] JJ Rutz et al. 2019. The atmospheric river tracking method intercomparison project (ARTMIP): quantifying uncertainties
in atmospheric river climatology. J. Geophys. Res. Atmos. (2019).
[238] K Ryan, J Lengyel, and M Shatruk. 2018. Crystal structure prediction via deep learning. J. Am. Chem. Soc 140, 32
(2018), 10158–10168.
[239] M Sadoughi and C Hu. 2019. Physics-based convolutional neural network for fault diagnosis of rolling element
bearings. IEEE Sensors Journal (2019).
[240] P Sadowski et al. 2016.
Synergies Between Quantum Mechanics and Machine Learning in Reaction
Prediction.
J. Chem. Inf. Model. 56, 11 (2016), 2125–2128.
https://doi.org/10.1021/acs.jcim.6b00351
arXiv:https://doi.org/10.1021/acs.jcim.6b00351 PMID: 27749058.
[241] O San and R Maulik. 2018. Machine learning closures for model order reduction of thermal fluids. Appl. Math. Model.
(2018).
[242] O San and R Maulik. 2018. Neural network closures for nonlinear model order reduction. Adv Comput Math 44, 6
(2018), 1717–1750.
[243] GR Schleder et al. 2019. From DFT to machine learning: recent approaches to materials science–a review. J. Phys.
Materials 2, 3 (2019), 032001.
[244] M Schmidt and H Lipson. 2009. Distilling free-form natural laws from experimental data. Science (2009).
[245] K Schütt et al. 2017. Schnet: A continuous-filter convolutional neural network for modeling quantum interactions. In
NeurIPS. 991–1001.
[246] O Senouf et al. 2019. Self-supervised learning of inverse problem solvers in medical imaging. In Domain Adaptation
and Representation Transfer and Medical Image Learning with Less Labels and Imperfect Data. Springer.
[247] S Shah et al. 2018. Airsim: High-fidelity visual and physical simulation for autonomous vehicles. In Field and service
robotics. Springer, 621–635.
[248] V Shah et al. 2019. Encoding invariances in deep generative models. arXiv:1906.01626 (2019).
[249] E Sharifi, B Saghafian, and R Steinacker. 2019. Downscaling satellite precipitation estimates with multiple linear
regression, artificial neural networks, and spline interpolation techniques. J. Geophys. Res. Atmos. 124, 2 (2019),
789–805.
[250] AS Sharma, I Mezi´c, and BJ McKeon. 2016. Correspondence between Koopman mode decomposition, resolvent mode
decomposition, and invariant solutions of the Navier-Stokes equations. Phys. Rev. Fluids 1, 3 (2016), 032402.
[251] R Sharma et al. 2018. Weakly-supervised deep learning of heat transport via physics informed loss. arXiv:1807.11374
(2018).
, Vol. 1, No. 1, Article . Publication date: March 2020.

Physics-Guided Machine Learning Survey
33
[252] J Sirignano and K Spiliopoulos. 2018. DGM: A deep learning algorithm for solving partial differential equations. J.
Comput. Phys 375 (2018), 1339–1364.
[253] D Solle et al. 2017. Between the poles of data-driven and mechanistic modeling for process operation. Chemie
Ingenieur Technik (2017).
[254] PK Srivastava et al. 2013. Machine learning techniques for downscaling SMOS satellite soil moisture using MODIS
land surface temperature for hydrological application. Water Resour. Manag. 27, 8 (2013), 3127–3144.
[255] P Sturmfels et al. 2018.
A domain guided CNN architecture for predicting age from structural brain images.
arXiv:1808.04362 (2018).
[256] J Sun et al. 2020. A theory-guided deep-learning formulation and optimization of seismic waveform inversion.
Geophysics 85, 2 (2020), R87–R99.
[257] DH Svendsen et al. 2017. Joint Gaussian processes for biophysical parameter retrieval. IEEE Trans Geosci Remote
Sens 56, 3 (2017), 1718–1727.
[258] L Swiler et al. 2020. A Survey of Constrained Gaussian Process Regression: Approaches and Implementation
Challenges. arXiv:2006.09319 (2020).
[259] N Tajbakhsh et al. 2016. Convolutional neural networks for medical image analysis: Full training or fine tuning? IEEE
Trans. Med. Imaging. 35, 5 (2016), 1299–1312.
[260] N Takeishi, Y Kawahara, and T Yairi. 2017. Learning Koopman invariant subspaces for dynamic mode decomposition.
In Adv. Neural Inf. Process. Syst. 1130–1140.
[261] A Tanaka, A Tomiya, and K Hashimoto. 2021. Deep Learning and Physics. Springer Nature.
[262] K Tayal et al. 2020. Inverse problems, deep learning, and symmetry breaking. arXiv:2003.09077 (2020).
[263] K Tayal et al. 2020. Unlocking inverse problems using deep learning: Breaking symmetries in phase retrieval. In
NeurIPS.
[264] C Tesche et al. 2018. Coronary CT angiography–derived fractional flow reserve: machine learning algorithm versus
computational fluid dynamics modeling. Radiology 288, 1 (2018), 64–72.
[265] FD Theurer, KA Voos, and WJ Miller. 1984. Instream water temperature model. Div. Biol. Serv., Tech. Rep. FWS OBS
84, 15 (1984), 11–42.
[266] ML Thompson and MA Kramer. 1994. Modeling chemical processes using prior knowledge and neural networks.
AIChE Journal 40, 8 (1994), 1328–1340.
[267] J Tobin et al. 2017. Domain randomization for transferring deep neural networks from simulation to the real world. In
IEEE/RSJ IROS. IEEE, 23–30.
[268] P Toth et al. 2019. Hamiltonian generative networks. arXiv:1909.13789 (2019).
[269] RK Tripathy and I Bilionis. 2018. Deep UQ: Learning deep neural network surrogate models for high dimensional
uncertainty quantification. J. Comput. Phys (2018).
[270] S Udrescu and M Tegmark. 2020. AI Feynman: A physics-inspired method for symbolic regression. Sci. Adv. 6, 16
(2020), eaay2631.
[271] D Ulyanov, A Vedaldi, and V Lempitsky. 2018. Deep image prior. In CVPR.
[272] J Vamaraju and MK Sen. 2019. Unsupervised physics-based neural networks for seismic migration. Interpretation
(2019).
[273] T Vandal et al. 2017. Deepsd: Generating high resolution climate change projections through single image super-
resolution. In SIGKDD ’17. 1663–1672.
[274] T Vandal et al. 2018. Quantifying uncertainty in discrete-continuous and skewed data with Bayesian deep learning. In
SIGKDD ’18. 2377–2386.
[275] C Varadharajan. 2021. Using Machine Learning to Develop a Predictive Understanding of the Impacts of Extreme
Water Cycle Perturbations on River Water Quality. Technical Report. AI4ESP.
[276] PR Vlachas et al. 2018. Data-driven forecasting of high-dimensional chaotic systems with long short-term memory
networks. Proc. R. Soc. A (2018).
[277] L von Rueden et al. 2020. Informed machine learning–a taxonomy and survey of integrating knowledge into learning
systems. arXiv:1903.12394 (2020).
[278] ZY Wan et al. 2018. Data-assisted reduced-order modeling of extreme events in complex dynamical systems. PloS one
(2018).
[279] JX Wang, JL Wu, and H Xiao. 2017. Physics-informed machine learning approach for reconstructing Reynolds stress
modeling discrepancies based on DNS data. Phys. Rev. Fluids 2, 3 (2017), 034603.
[280] L Wang, J Chen, and M Marathe. 2020. TDEFSI: Theory-guided Deep Learning-based Epidemic Forecasting with
Synthetic Information. ACM Trans. Spat. Algorithms Syst. 6, 3 (2020), 1–39.
[281] R Wang, R Walters, and R Yu. 2020. Incorporating Symmetry into Deep Dynamics Models for Improved Generalization.
arXiv:2002.03061 (2020).
, Vol. 1, No. 1, Article . Publication date: March 2020.

34
Jared Willard, Xiaowei Jia, Shaoming Xu, Michael Steinbach, and Vipin Kumar
[282] S Wang, Y Teng, and P Perdikaris. 2021. Understanding and mitigating gradient flow pathologies in physics-informed
neural networks. SIAM J Sci Comput 43, 5 (2021), A3055–A3081.
[283] Z Wang et al. 2018. Successful leveraging of image processing and machine learning in seismic structural interpretation:
A review. The Leading Edge 37, 6 (2018), 451–461.
[284] C Wehmeyer and F Noé. 2018. Time-lagged autoencoders: Deep learning of slow collective variables for molecular
kinetics. J. Chem. Phys 148, 24 (2018), 241703.
[285] H Wei et al. 2018. Predicting the effective thermal conductivities of composite materials and porous media by machine
learning methods. Int. J. Heat Mass Transf. 127 (2018), 908–916.
[286] JD Willard et al. 2021. Predicting Water Temperature Dynamics of Unmonitored Lakes With Meta-Transfer Learning.
Water Resour. Res. 57, 7 (2021), e2021WR029579.
[287] CKI Williams and CE Rasmussen. 2006. Gaussian processes for machine learning. Vol. 2. MIT press Cambridge,
MA.
[288] N Winovich, K Ramani, and G Lin. 2019. ConvPDE-UQ: Convolutional neural networks with quantified uncertainty
for heterogeneous elliptic partial differential equations on varied domains. J. Comput. Phys 394 (2019), 263–279.
[289] H Wu et al. 2017. Variational Koopman models: slow collective variables and molecular kinetics from short off-
equilibrium simulations. J. Chem. Phys 146, 15 (2017), 154104.
[290] JL Wu et al. 2016. Physics-informed machine learning for predictive turbulence modeling: A priori assessment of
prediction confidence. arXiv:1607.04563 (2016).
[291] JL Wu et al. 2019. Enforcing statistical constraints in generative adversarial networks for modeling chaotic dynamical
systems. J. Comput. Phys (2019), 109209.
[292] JL Wu et al. 2020. Enforcing statistical constraints in generative adversarial networks for modeling chaotic dynamical
systems. J. Comput. Phys (2020).
[293] JL Wu, H Xiao, and E Paterson. 2018. Physics-informed machine learning approach for augmenting turbulence models:
A comprehensive framework. Phys. Rev. Fluids 3, 7 (2018), 074602.
[294] Y Wu et al. 2020. Inductive Graph Neural Networks for Spatiotemporal Kriging. arXiv:2006.07527 (2020).
[295] D Xiao et al. 2019. A reduced order model for turbulent flows in the urban environment using machine learning.
Building and Environment 148 (2019), 323–337.
[296] You Xie et al. 2018. tempogan: A temporally coherent, volumetric gan for super-resolution fluid flow. ACM Trans.
Graph 37, 4 (2018), 1–15.
[297] TF Xu and AJ Valocchi. 2015. Data-driven methods to improve baseflow prediction of a regional groundwater model.
Comput. Geosci. (2015).
[298] W Yan et al. 2011. Bayesian migration of Gaussian process regression for rapid process modeling and optimization.
Chem. Eng. J. 166, 3 (2011), 1095–1103.
[299] L Yang et al. 2019. Highly-Ccalable, Physics-Informed GANs for Learning Solutions of Stochastic PDEs. In 2019
IEEE/ACM Deep Learning on Supercomputers. IEEE.
[300] L Yang, X Meng, and G Karniadakis. 2020. B-PINNs: Bayesian physics-informed neural networks for forward and
inverse PDE problems with noisy data. arXiv:2003.06097 (2020).
[301] L Yang, D Zhang, and GE Karniadakis. 2018. Physics-informed generative adversarial networks for stochastic
differential equations. arXiv:1811.02033 (2018).
[302] T Yang et al. 2019. Evaluation and machine learning improvement of global hydrological model-based flood simulations.
Environ. Res. Lett 14, 11 (2019), 114027.
[303] Y Yang and P Perdikaris. 2018. Physics-informed deep generative models. arXiv:1812.03511 (2018).
[304] Y Yang and P Perdikaris. 2019. Adversarial uncertainty quantification in physics-informed neural networks. J. Comput.
Phys (2019).
[305] K Yao et al. 2018. The TensorMol-0.1 model chemistry: a neural network augmented with long-range physics. Chem.
Sci. (Jan 2018).
[306] A Yazdani, M Raissi, and G Karniadakis. 2019. Systems biology informed deep learning for inferring parameters and
hidden dynamics. bioRxiv (2019), 865063.
[307] E Yeung, S Kundu, and N Hodas. 2019. Learning deep neural network representations for Koopman operators of
nonlinear dynamical systems. In American Control Conference. IEEE, 4832–4839.
[308] Y Zeng et al. 2019. Enforcing deterministic constraints on Generative Adversarial Networks for emulating physical
systems. arXiv:1911.06671 (2019).
[309] L Zepeda-Núñez, Y Chen, J Zhang, W Jia, L Zhang, and L Lin. 2019. Deep Density: circumventing the Kohn-Sham
equations via symmetry preserving neural networks. arXiv:1912.00775 (2019).
[310] L Zhang et al. 2018. Deep potential molecular dynamics: a scalable model with the accuracy of quantum mechanics.
Phys. Rev. Lett. 120, 14 (2018), 143001.
, Vol. 1, No. 1, Article . Publication date: March 2020.

Physics-Guided Machine Learning Survey
35
[311] Linfeng Zhang, Jiequn Han, Han Wang, Roberto Car, and Weinan E. 2018. DeePCG: Constructing coarse-grained
models via deep neural networks. J. Chem. Phys 149, 3 (2018), 034101.
[312] L Zhang, G Wang, and GB Giannakis. 2019. Real-time power system state estimation and forecasting via deep unrolled
neural networks. IEEE Trans. Signal Process 67, 15 (2019), 4069–4077.
[313] R Zhang, Y Liu, and H Sun. 2019. Physics-guided Convolutional Neural Network (PhyCNN) for Data-driven Seismic
Response Modeling. arXiv:1909.08118 (2019).
[314] X Zhang et al. 2009. Estimating uncertainty of streamflow simulation using Bayesian neural networks. Water Resour.
Res. (2009).
[315] Z Zhang et al. 2014. Facial landmark detection by deep multi-task learning. In ECCV. Springer.
[316] Q Zheng et al. 2019. Physics-informed semantic inpainting: Application to geostatistical modeling. arXiv:1909.09459
(2019).
[317] YD Zhong, B Dey, and A Chakraborty. 2019. Symplectic ODE-Net: Learning Hamiltonian Dynamics with Control.
arXiv:1909.12077 (2019).
[318] Y Zhu et al. 2019. Physics-constrained deep learning for high-dimensional surrogate modeling and uncertainty
quantification without labeled data. J. Comput. Phys (2019).
[319] Y Zhu and N Zabaras. 2018. Bayesian deep convolutional encoder–decoder networks for surrogate modeling and
uncertainty quantification. J. Comput. Phys (2018).
[320] N Zobeiry and KD Humfeld. 2021. A physics-informed machine learning approach for solving heat transfer equation
in advanced manufacturing and engineering applications. Eng. Appl. Artif. Intell. 101 (2021), 104232.
, Vol. 1, No. 1, Article . Publication date: March 2020.
