Neural Network-based Classiﬁcation of Crystal Symmetries from X-Ray Diffraction Patterns
Pascal Marc Vecsei,1 Kenny Choo,1 Johan Chang,1 and Titus Neupert1
1Department of Physics, University of Zurich, Winterthurerstrasse 190, 8057 Zurich, Switzerland
(Dated: December 17, 2018)
Machine learning algorithms based on artiﬁcial neural networks have proven very useful for a variety of clas-
siﬁcation problems. Here we apply them to a well-known problem in crystallography, namely the classiﬁcation
of X-ray diffraction patterns (XRD) of inorganic powder specimens by the respective crystal system and space
group. Over 105 theoretically computed powder XRD patterns were obtained from inorganic crystal structure
databases and used to train a deep dense neural network. For space group classiﬁcation, we obtain an accuracy
of around 54% on experimental data. Finally, we introduce a scheme where the network has the option to refuse
the classiﬁcation of XRD patterns that would be classiﬁed with a large uncertainty. This enhances the accuracy
on experimental data to 82% at the expense of having half of the experimental data unclassiﬁed. With further
improvements of neural network architecture and experimental data availability, machine learning constitutes a
promising complement to classical structure determination methodology.
I.
INTRODUCTION
Elastic scattering of plane waves is a powerful technique
to reveal the structure of translationally invariant systems.
Diffraction has been successfully applied to atomic [1], mag-
netic [2], superconducting vortex [3] and even protein lat-
tices [4] to uncover their crystal structures. Such structure
determination can have far reaching implications and promi-
nent examples are: (i) The correct helical DNA structure was
ﬁrst inferred from interpretation of diffraction patterns [5, 6].
(ii) For the production of widely used carbon steel avoiding
certain crystal structures by thermal quenching is imperative
for high-quality material properties [7]. (iii) In drug design,
diffraction determination of protein structures is crucial [8].
The determination of crystal structures based on diffraction
experiments is therefore an important activity. A sub-problem
is the determination of crystal symmetries. As there is a ﬁnite
number of space groups, interpretation of diffraction patterns
is then in essence a classiﬁcation problem. A prevalent strat-
egy is to model the diffracted Bragg reﬂections through the
form and structure factors [1]. Crystal structure determination
is then settled by the best ﬁt to the experimental data. The
recent broad dissemination of machine learning algorithms in
science, game theory and technology is driven, for a large part,
by the ability of neural networks to – after training – classify
data [9–25]. There, neural networks are able to acquire im-
plicit knowledge through which classiﬁcation can be achieved
without prior information about which features in the data are
relevant for the classiﬁcation. It is thus of great interest to
apply these algorithms to the interpretation of diffraction pat-
terns [23].
In this work, we study the problem of space group determi-
nation from powder X-ray diffraction (XRD) patterns using
artiﬁcial neural networks. We restrict ourselves to inorganic
nonmagnetic materials and employ a fully supervised learn-
ing scheme for this classiﬁcation task. To train the network,
we generate a large amount of data theoretically, by com-
puting diffraction patterns based on crystal structure informa-
tion of real crystals obtained from various databases [26–32].
The trained network is then tested on both theoretical and ex-
perimental data, the latter being obtained from the RRUFF
database [33]. A recent study [23] reported, using a convolu-
tional neural network architecture, a remarkable classiﬁcation
accuracy of over 80% on theoretical data despite failing to cor-
rectly classify the few experimental data they obtained. We
contrast the performance of this convolutional network with a
simple dense network and demonstrate that the dense network
performs signiﬁcantly better on experimental data. Further-
more, it is found that when the network misclassiﬁes a struc-
ture, the wrongly predicted space group often differs from
the correct one by only a few symmetry elements. Finally,
we show that a classiﬁcation accuracy of above 80% can be
achieved for experimental data, if about half of the data is left
unclassiﬁed because the network is not certain about it. This is
practically relevant since it is better to know that a network is
uncertain than for the network to give a wrong classiﬁcation.
Our results demonstrate that neural networks can be useful
in classifying experimental XRD patterns by the space group
of the crystal even when training is done only with theoreti-
cally computed data. While the accuracy achieved in this clas-
siﬁcation is not sufﬁcient to rely on this method alone, it may
be used to enhance and complement existing algorithms. In
any case, the classiﬁcation accuracy of 50% we obtain for ex-
perimental data is already a considerable achievement given
that (i) there are 230 space groups to differentiate, (ii) the ex-
perimental data is not perfect due to ﬁnite counting statistics
and backgrounds, crystal defects, and minority phases, (iii) no
prior knowledge about the task is used in training the network
and the data is not pre-processed.
The paper is structured as follows: In Sec. II we explain in
more detail the problem that the neural network is set out to
solve. Section III introduces the structure of the neural net-
works that we use as well as the training algorithm.
Sec-
tion IV shows how the theoretical training data is prepared,
and Sec. V discusses all the results including the performance
comparison between the convolutional and the dense network.
II.
X-RAY DIFFRACTION AND CRYSTAL SYMMETRIES
The goal of our machine learning task is to predict crys-
tal symmetry (crystal system and space group) from powder
arXiv:1812.05625v1  [cond-mat.dis-nn]  13 Dec 2018

2
XRD patterns. There are seven crystal systems and 230 space
groups. In an XRD experiment, the photons scatter off the
atoms in the crystal, interfere and produce Bragg diffraction
patterns which are collected by a detector. Since the sam-
ple is powdered, all crystal orientations are represented and
hence the diffraction pattern shows rings centred about the
beam axis, i.e., the intensity pattern S(2θ) is a function of the
scattering angle 2θ with respect to the beam axis. In Fig. 1, ex-
amples of such diffraction patterns are shown. Since the inter-
ference depends on the relative positions of the atoms within
the crystal, information regarding the crystal symmetries is
contained within the XRD pattern.
(a)
(b)
Experimentally obtained 
XRD pattern
Theoretically computed 
 XRD pattern
FIG. 1. Typical samples of powder XRD patterns. (a) XRD pat-
tern for Borax Na2[B4O5(OH)4] · 8H2O (obtained from the RRUFF
database); (b) Theoretically computed XRD pattern for C2(Si6Cl14)
including noise and background.
Both compounds belong to the
space group 15.
Conventional methods [34–39] for obtaining the space
group from the XRD pattern generally involve performing
some peak ﬁnding algorithm. Our objective is to train a neu-
ral network such that it learns the relevant features of the
interference pattern in order to correctly predict the crystal
symmetry without relying on preprocessing of the data to
identify peaks. The XRD pattern, i.e., the Bragg peak posi-
tions in 2θ, depends on the wavelength of the photons. Gen-
erally, the patterns can be expressed in terms of scattering
wavevectors q = 4π sin(θ)/λ. However, for direct compar-
ison with Ref.[23], we ﬁxed the wavelength at the copper Kα-
line (λ = 1.54 ˚A) and hence we display our results as a func-
tion of 2θ. Since a neural network takes a ﬁnite number of in-
puts, we express the intensity function S(2θ) as a vector. We
set the range from 5◦< 2θ < 90◦with a spacing of 0.01◦. In
addition, we normalize the functions such that its largest value
is one.
III.
NEURAL NETWORK AND TRAINING ALGORITHM
Artiﬁcial neural networks are variational approximations
to arbitrary functions. Many variants and architectures ex-
ist. Here, we consider the so-called feedforward neural net-
works (FFNN). They consist of a series of successively ap-
plied maps. Each map constitutes a “layer” of the network.
By deﬁnition, the ﬁrst layer is the input layer and the last layer
is the output layer of the network.
Let vn be the output of layer n and deﬁne the input to the
network to be v0. The output of layer n is then the input
for layer n + 1. At each layer, we perform a transformation
to go from one layer to the next. The most important layer
consists of an afﬁne map followed by a non-linear function
(or activation function) gn, i.e.,
vn →vn+1 = gn(Wnvn + bn),
(1)
where Wn is the so-called weight matrix and bn is the bias
vector. When no further constraints are imposed on the weight
matrix and bias vector, the layer is called a dense layer. In
a so-called convolutional layer, by contrast, not all elements
of the weight matrix can be freely chosen. There is a set of
constraints which reduces the number of learnable parameters.
This allows one to effectively use networks for much larger
dimensions of the input vectors and to build both “deeper”
and “wider” networks consisting of more layers. There are
other types of layers with speciﬁc purpose, such as pooling
layers and dropout layers [40].
An important freedom in the setup of the network is the
choice of activation function gn. For all layers apart from
the ﬁnal output layer, we use the rectiﬁed linear unit (ReLU)
deﬁned by
ReLU(z) = max(0, z) ,
(2)
which is applied element wise to the vector vn. For the output
layer, we use the softmax function given by
SoftMax(vn)i =
exp(vn,i)
P
j exp(vn,j).
(3)
This softmax function is positive deﬁnite and normalized to 1
such that the output layer can be interpreted as a probability
distribution.
In this paper, we consider two different network architec-
tures, a convolutional network (this is the same architecture
as in Ref. [23]) and a dense network. We use a one-hot encod-
ing for representing the different possible classiﬁcation cate-
gories. This means that the ﬁnal layer of the network has as
many nodes as there are categories for a certain classiﬁcation
of the input data, i.e., 7 nodes if we are classifying crystal

3
input
8500
dense
4000
relu
dropout, 0.6
dense
3000
relu
dropout, 0.5
dense
1000
relu
dropout, 0.4
dense
800
relu
dropout, 0.3
dense
230
softmax
input
10001
convolution
f: 80, k: 100, s: 5
relu
dropout, 0.3
Average Pooling
p: 3, s: 2
convolution
f: 80, k: 50, s: 5
relu
dropout,0.3
Average Pooling
p: 3
convolution
f: 80, k: 25, s: 2
relu
dropout,0.3
Average Pooling
p: 3
Flatten
dense
2300
relu
dropout, 0.5
dense
1150
relu
dropout, 0.5
dense
230
softmax
(a)
(b)
FIG. 2. Network architectures used for classifying space groups from powder XRD patterns. (a) Convolutional neural network as used in
Ref. [23]; (b) Dense network. Blue layers represents convolutional layers with f ﬁlters of size k and stride s, green layers correspond to
dense layers with the number of nodes given by the value within and yellow layers are dropout layers with the indicated dropout rate. The
gray layers are the input layers with the number denoting the corresponding input size. The XRD patterns are zero padded to match the input
size. Evaluated on the experimental samples from the RRUFF database, we achieved a accuracy of 42% for the convolutional network and an
accuracy of 54% for the dense network.
systems and 230 if we are classifying space groups. A fully
conﬁdent classiﬁcation into category i then corresponds to an
output vector equal to the unit vector in i direction. More gen-
erally, the network’s prediction is taken to be the category with
the largest component of the output vector. The precise net-
work architectures we used for space group classiﬁcation are
shown in Fig. 2. Notice that the ﬁnal layer contains 230 nodes
corresponding to different possible space groups. The net-
works used for classifying crystal systems are nearly identical
apart from the ﬁnal few layers since the output layer should
have only 7 nodes.
We now proceed to explain how the network is trained. For
that, we use a labelled dataset {(x, lx)} where x is the sample
input (the XRD pattern) and lx is the correct label (the space
group or crystal system to which the pattern belongs). Let
the network output distribution corresponding to the input x
be given by yx, and that corresponding to the correct label
is deﬁned via its components yc
x,i = δi,lx. The network is
trained by minimizing the following cost functions: the mean-
squared-error or quadratic cost
Cquad = 1
n
X
x
|yx −yc
x|2
(4)
and the categorical cross entropy
Ccross = −1
n
X
x
[yc
x · ln yx + (1 −yc
x) · ln(1 −yx)] , (5)
where the sum is over the training dataset. To minimize the
cost function, we use a gradient decent type optimizer called
adaptive moment estimation (Adam) [41] which proceeds as
follows. We denote by αr the collection of all network param-
eters, i.e., all the entries of weight matrices and bias vectors,
where r indexes all these quantities.
1. At step t, compute the gradient of the cost function C
with respect to the network parameters,
gr;t = ∇αrC
(6)
2. Compute the decaying ﬁrst and second moments of the
past gradients
mr;t = β1mr;t−1 + (1 −β1)gr;t,
vr;t = β2vr;t−1 + (1 −β2)g2
r;t,
(7)
where β1 and β2 are the hyperparameters controlling
the decay rate.
3. Because these moments are initialized to zero (mr;0 =
vr;0 = 0), there is a bias towards zero. To counteract
this, we deﬁne the bias-corrected moments
ˆmr;t =
mr;t
1 −βt
1
,
ˆvr;t =
vr;t
1 −βt
2
.
(8)
4. Update the parameters of the network as
αr →αr −
η
p
ˆvr;t + ϵ ˆmr;t,
(9)
where η is the learning rate and ϵ is a smoothing term
to prevent division by zero.
We used the standard values for the hyperparameters of the
Adam optimizer: η = 0.001, β1 = 0.9, β2 = 0.999 and
ϵ = 10−8.
In order to speed up the training, instead of summing over
the entire dataset in the cost functions C, we can perform the

4
sum over a randomly selected batch of samples. This intro-
duces noise in the computation of the derivative. The smaller
the batch size, the larger the noise. It is thus necessary to ﬁnd
a trade-off between speed and accuracy. However, it should be
noted that a certain amount of noise can be useful to prevent
the network from getting trapped in local minima.
In each iteration, a batch of samples from the training data
is fed to the network and the parameters are updated according
to the algorithm above. An epoch is the number of iterations
needed to transverse the entire dataset. During the training,
we alternate between the quadratic cost Cquad on even epochs
and the cross entropy Ccross on odd epochs. The reason for this
is that the categorical cross entropy helps to speed up conver-
gence while the quadratic error is necessary for the network
to produce a more meaningful output distribution. Without
the quadratic error, the output of the dense network is always
close to a one-hot encoded vector even for wrong predictions.
IV.
DATA PREPARATION
The XRD patterns used for training the networks were
computed theoretically from the crystal structure informa-
tion obtained from the Inorganic Crystal Structure Database
(ICSD) [26] which provides the crystallographic information
ﬁle (CIF) of many inorganic substances. We removed du-
plicates (some crystal structures appeared more than once in
the database) from the training data. With this restriction, a
dataset of 128404 samples was obtained.
The CIF contains the necessary information required to
compute XRD patterns. Using the Python pymatgen library
[42], we computed the theoretical XRD pattern in terms of
peak heights and positions from the CIF. The peak heights
and positions are then convolved with a Gaussian function of
variable standard deviation σ to mimic the ﬁnite experimental
resolution.
However, these theoretically computed patterns still lack
counting statistics and background signals present in real ex-
perimental data. A network trained using only such data may
interpret the experimental noise as Bragg peaks potentially
causing a misclassiﬁcation. To simulate statistical noise, we
augment our XRD patterns with a random signal drawn from a
uniform distribution. In addition, we add a background signal
f(θ) which is the sum of the following functions:
1. Smooth step functions:
fstepup(θ) = h

1
1 + exp[a(θ −θstep)]

fstepdown(θ) = h

1 −
1
1 + exp[a(θ −θstep)]

(10)
where h, a and θs gives the height, steepness, and posi-
tion of the step, respectively.
2. Fourth-order polynomials
fp(θ) =

4
X
n=0
anθn

(11)
where the coefﬁcient an are chosen randomly.
3. To mimic enhanced background near the direct beam
(small scattering angles 2θ), but before the beam-stop,
we used
fbump(θ) = h(nθ)2e−nθ
(12)
where h is setting the magnitude and n is a measure of
the steepness.
The exact details of how these background and noise parame-
ters are chosen is given in the appendix.
In Fig. 1, we compare the XRD pattern produced using
the above procedure with a true experimental data from the
RRUFF database. The noise and background signals in the
two patterns are relatively similar suggesting that the method
we used to create the data could help the network generalize
better to experimental conditions. As a side note, it can be
seen that although both crystals in Fig. 1 correspond to space
group 15, their XRD patterns barely have any similarities that
can be easily picked out by the naked eye. This illustrates
the signiﬁcant difﬁculty in the classiﬁcation problem that the
network faces.
The full dataset is then divided into three sets: test, valida-
tion and training. The test and validation sets have a size of
7000 each, leaving us with 114404 samples in the training set.
V.
RESULTS AND DISCUSSION
A.
Training
Using the dataset described in the previous section, we train
the network architectures shown in Fig. 2. The evolution of
the classiﬁcation accuracies of the networks over both the test
set and the RRUFF database (real experimental data) during
the training are shown in Fig. 3. The accuracies were averaged
over ten trained networks initialized with a different random
seed. For the ﬁnal prediction, the output of the network was
averaged over the ensemble of ten networks. The ﬁnal accu-
racies of the network ensembles are summarized in Table I.
Figure 3 (a) and (b) shows the results for the crystal systems
and space groups, respectively.
Crystal systems Space groups
Test set RRUFF Test set RRUFF
Convolutional
85%
56%
76%
42%
Dense
73%
70%
57%
54%
TABLE I. Obtained classiﬁcation accuracies of the convolutional and
dense networks for the theoretically computed test set data and for
the experimental RRUFF data.
As expected, the networks are clearly more accurate in clas-
sifying the theoretical test data (which has the same noise and
background structure as the training data) than the experimen-
tal data (which contains noise and background structures not
present in the training data). This suggests that despite the

5
(a)
(b)
(c)
FIG. 3. Network classiﬁcation accuracies. (a) and (b) show the evolution of the network accuracies evaluated over the test set and the RRUFF
database, which consists of experimentally obtained XRD patterns, for (a) the classiﬁcation of crystal systems and (b) the classiﬁcation of
space groups. The accuracies are averaged over ten networks initialized with a different random seeds. While the convolutional network
performs better on the training data in both cases, the dense network generalizes better to the experimental RRUFF database. (c) Histogram of
the distances between network’s prediction and correct space group classiﬁcation. This distance is deﬁned on the maximal subgroup graph.
addition of background and noise there are still important sys-
tematic differences between the theoretical and experimental
data which may be one of the main obstacles for obtaining
a higher classiﬁcation accuracy on the experimental data. We
also note that the correct classiﬁcation may not be possible for
instance in the case of non-centrosymmetric crystals in which
the experiment averages over twin domains. However, it is
remarkable that this discrepancy is much larger in the convo-
lutional network as compared to the dense network. In fact
this discrepancy is so large that, even though the former had a
higher accuracy over the test set, the RRUFF database is sig-
niﬁcantly better classiﬁed by the dense network. This means
that the dense network generalizes better to imperfect data.
B.
Classiﬁcation Accuracy of Individual Space Groups
Next, we look at the classiﬁcation accuracies of individual
space groups. Since the distribution of space groups within the
training set is highly non-uniform, we expect that the trained
network would perform better at classifying the more com-
mon space groups. As can be seen in Fig. 4, this is indeed the
case. Moreover, we also observed that the larger space groups
(i.e., space groups with more symmetry elements) are more
accurately classiﬁed. This is not surprising since with more
symmetry elements there are more constraints on the struc-
ture factors giving rise to simpler XRD patterns with fewer
Bragg peaks.
C.
Maximal Subgroup Distance
To further elucidate the classiﬁcation quality of the net-
work, we consider the distance measure on the set of space
groups to assess how far a wrong classiﬁcation by the net-
work is off the correct classiﬁcation. This distance measure is
deﬁned through the concept of maximal subgroups. A maxi-
mal subgroup B of A is a proper subgroup such that no other
proper subgroups C strictly contains B. This allows us to con-
0
50
100
150
200
Space group
0.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0
Accuracy
2
12
14
15
62
139
194
225
227
FIG. 4.
Classiﬁcation accuracy of individual space groups.
The
colours denote the corresponding crystal system and the area of the
circle indicates its relative abundance in the training set.
Space
groups corresponding to larger indices tend to contain more sym-
metry elements. For instance, space group 1 contains no point group
symmetries whereas space group 230 contains the full set of cubic
symmetries. Depicted here are the accuracies for the theoretically
obtained test set, because the RRUFF database is too small to pro-
vide meaningful statistics for individual space groups. (There are
around 800 samples for 230 space groups in the RRUFF database.)
struct a graph where the nodes represent the space group and
two nodes are connected by an edge if one of the correspond-
ing space groups is a maximal subgroup of the other. We
can then deﬁne the maximal subgroup distance between two
space groups to be the shortest path connecting their respec-
tive nodes. Intuitively, one may expect that A and B differ by
a few symmetry elements such that their respective XRD pat-
terns should be relatively similar and the network may con-
fuse them more easily. Figure 3 (b) shows the histogram of
distances in the maximal subgroup graph for the network’s
prediction over both the test set and the RRUFF database. It
clearly illustrates that even when the network’s prediction is
incorrect, it is far from random. It often lies closer to the cor-

6
rect prediction than one would expect from a random choice.
This also suggest a possible alternative to interpret the clas-
siﬁcation output of the network: A space group prediction X
indicates with high probability that the corresponding crystal
is in X or in one of the neighbouring space groups in the max-
imal subgroup graph.
D.
Analysis of the Full Output Distribution of the Network
So far, we have only considered the space group/crystal sys-
tem that corresponds to the maximum of the output vector y
as the classiﬁcation result of the network. However, the net-
work’s output y is in fact a probability distribution over the
possible categories that contains much more information. We
deﬁne the network’s ﬁrst prediction (this is the same as the
network’s prediction result) as the most probable category, the
second prediction as the next most probable and so on.
In Fig. 5 (e), we show the ﬁrst 10 predictions of neural net-
works evaluated on the test set and RRUFF database. As ex-
pected, we can see from the decreasing distance between con-
secutive data points that the ﬁrst prediction is more often cor-
rect than the second prediction, the second prediction is more
often correct than the third and so on. This shows that there is
additional useful information contained within the network’s
output on top of just its prediction which corresponds to its
ﬁrst prediction. Therefore, if we ﬁnd that the network’s pre-
diction is wrong, the next most likely correct answer is indeed
the second prediction. In other words, the probability distri-
bution over the various categories as given by the network’s
output vector y is a good prior.
E.
Network Certainty
Finally, we consider how to use network’s certainty of its
prediction to enhance the classiﬁcation accuracies. Given a
network output y, the certainty is then deﬁned by the proba-
bility of the network’s prediction, i.e.,
certainty = max
i
yi,
(13)
where i runs over all space groups/crystal systems.
In Fig. 5 (a) and (b), we show the classiﬁcation certain-
ties of both the convolutional and dense networks evaluated
over the RRUFF dataset. The ﬁgures show that for the dense
network, when the prediction is correct, the certainty is high.
This result can be used to increase the accuracy of network
classiﬁcations, if one allows the network to not classify inputs
with low certainty, as follows: Let y be the network’s out-
put for some input XRD pattern that is to be classiﬁed. If the
networks certainty is above a certain threshold, we accept the
classiﬁcation. Otherwise we say that the network is uncertain
and leave the input unclassiﬁed. Figure 5 (c) and (d), shows
the result of such a scheme: Placing the certainty threshold
at 0.45, we get a classiﬁcation accuracy of around 82% for
the dense network on the RRUFF database at the cost of hav-
ing half of the data unclassiﬁed. The rationale behind such
a tradeoff is that it is better to know that the network is un-
certain about a (possibly low-quality) input rather than for the
network to give a wrong classiﬁcation.
It is imperative to use Fig. 5 for a comparison between the
convolutional and the dense network. Whereas the dense net-
work’s prediction is often correct when it is certain, the cor-
relation between certainty and correct classiﬁcation is much
weaker in the convolutional network. For instance, if we im-
pose the same certainty threshold of 0.45 on the convolutional
network, we would have around 69% unclassiﬁed data, and if
we impose a threshold such that only half of the data is un-
classiﬁed, the ﬁnal classiﬁcation accuracy is only 65%. This
once again suggests that the convolutional network is not gen-
eralizing well to the experimental data.
VI.
CONCLUSION
We have trained neural networks for the purpose of classi-
fying powder XRD patterns by the respective crystal system
and space group of the crystal. The training was performed
with theoretically computed training data based on real crystal
structures. In order for the trained network to classify exper-
imentally obtained data, we added noise and artiﬁcially con-
structed background signals to the training data.
In particular, we compared the performance of a convolu-
tional network that was previously introduced in Ref. [23] for
the same purpose and a deep dense neural network. We ﬁnd
that although the convolutional network classiﬁes theoretical
data much more accurately, it generalizes poorly to experi-
mental data. This is consistent with the results in Ref. [23],
where it was found that even though the network had above
80% accuracy on theoretical data, it failed on all of three ex-
perimental samples studied. We ﬁnd that the deep dense net-
work has a higher classiﬁcation accuracy (54%) on experi-
mental data than the convolutional network (42%).
Next, to better understand the quality of the network’s pre-
diction, we used the concept of maximal subgroups to provide
a distance measure on the set of space groups. We found that
even though the network might give a wrong prediction, this
predicted space group is not random but instead lies close to
the correct answer.
Finally, we analyzed the network’s certainty to enhance the
classiﬁcation accuracy. By allowing the network to be un-
decided about a subset of the predictions, we were able to
enhance the classiﬁcation accuracy of the dense network (on
experimental data) to 82% at the expense of leaving around
half of the samples unclassiﬁed. This could be considered an
improvement since it is helpful to know beforehand that a net-
work’s prediction is wrong. For the convolutional network, in
contrast, we ﬁnd that the certainty is not as good an indicator
of correctness of the network’s prediction.
Several routes for future improvements on our results
present themselves and may lead to broad applications of ma-
chine learning techniques for crystallography. For one, the
models we employ for artiﬁcial noise and background signals
may be improved to increase the accuracy. Second, perfor-
mant algorithms may be obtained by employing traditional

7
(d)
(e)
(a)
(b)
(c)
FIG. 5. (a) Ratio of samples which are correctly classiﬁed by the n highest outputs. (b) and (c) are histograms showing the number of samples
in the RRUFF database which are classiﬁed correctly or wrongly with a given certainty of the network. (b) Convolutional network. (c) Dense
network. (d) and (e) depicts how the accuracy (fraction of correctly classiﬁed samples on the RRUFF database) of the network changes as
the certainty cut-off is varied. The orange line gives the ratio of unclassiﬁed samples as the cut-off is varied while the blue lines shows the
accuracy of the network given a certain ratio of unclassiﬁed samples. The dotted lines indicate the accuracy when 50% of the samples are
unclassiﬁed. At this cut-off level, the accuracies are 65% and 82% for the (d) convolutional network and the (e) dense network, respectively.
and machine-learning algorithms, for instance to pre-process
the training data. Finally, a growing experimental database of
XRD samples may provide better, experimental training data.
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
We would like to thank Ruggero Frison, Antonio Cervel-
lino, Denis Cheptiakov, Ekaterina Pomjakushina, Pascal
Puphal, and Ann-Christin Dippel for discussions as well as
comments on the manuscript, and for sharing of their diffrac-
tion data. KC was supported by the European Unions Horizon
2020 research and innovation program (ERC-StG-Neupert-
757867-PARATOP). JC acknowledge support from the Swiss
National Science Foundation.
The machine learning tech-
niques were implemented using Keras [43] with a Tensorﬂow
backend [44].
APPENDIX: DATA PREPARATION
The XRD patterns used for training the networks were com-
puted theoretically from the crystal structures information ob-
tained from the Inorganic Crystal Structure Database [26]. We
denote the theoretically computed XRD pattern by ftheory(θ)
which is deﬁned on the domain θmin < θ < θmax and takes
values in the codomain 0 ≤ftheory(θ) ≤1 . However, these
patterns still lack the noise and background signals present in
real experimental data. A network trained using only such
data may interpret the experimental noise as Bragg peaks po-
tentially causing a misclassiﬁcation. To introduce noise, we
augment our XRD patterns with a random signal drawn from a
uniform distribution U(0.002, 0.02) between 0.002 and 0.02.
Next, to simulate a background we add a signal which is
composed of four different functions. These four functions
are selected with a 50% probability each, i.e., not all four
functions have to appear in our background signal. We also
deﬁne a threshold T given by
T =
0.1
number of different background functions chosen,
which controls the amplitude of each background function.
For convenience, we also deﬁne the relative angle θrel =
θ−θmin
θmax−θmin . The four background functions are given by:
1. Smooth step functions
fstepup(θ) = h

1
1 + exp[a(θrel −θrel,step)]

,
fstepdown(θ) = h

1 −
1
1 + exp[a(θrel −θrel,step)]

,
(14)
where h, a and θrel,step gives the height, steepness, and
position of the step, respectively. These parameters are
chosen as follows: h is drawn a truncated normal dis-
tribution h ∈[0, T] with mean µ = T/3 and standard
deviation σ = T/7, a is sampled from a uniform distri-
bution U(10, 60) and θrel,step for the step-up (step-down)
function is taken from a uniform distribution, with a
width of W = 1/7, at the left edge (right edge) of
the domain, i.e., U(0, W) for the step-up function and
U(1 −W, 1) for the step-down function.
2. Polynomials (up to fourth order)
fp(θ) =

nmax
X
n=0
anθn
rel
 ,
(15)
where nmax is a a random integer between 0 and 4. The
coefﬁcient an are chosen according to:
an =
(
0
with probability 0.5
3T
2(nmax+1)U(−1, 1)
with probability 0.5
(16)

8
3. Bumps near the left edge of the XRD pattern (near θmin),
to mimic the enhanced background near the direct beam
fbump(θ) = h(nθrel)2e−nθrel
(17)
where h is the height of the bump and n is a measure
of the steepness. h is drawn from a truncated normal
distribution h ∈[0, 3T/5] with mean µ = 2T/5 and
standard deviation σ = 3T/35 and n is taken from a
uniform distribution U(40, 70).
The full augmented XRD pattern is then given by
f(θ) =ftheory(θ) + fstepup(θ) + fstepdown(θ)
+ fp(θ) + fbump(θ)
+ noise,
(18)
where the parameters of the individual functions are chosen
independently according to the procedure described above.
1 H. M. Rietveld, Journal of Applied Crystallography 2, 65 (1969).
2 J. Rodrguez-Carvajal, Physica B: Condensed Matter 192, 55
(1993).
3 M. R. Eskildsen, E. M. Forgan, and H. Kawano-Furukawa, Re-
ports on Progress in Physics 74, 124504 (2011).
4 J. C. Kendrew, G. Bodo, H. M. Dintzis, R. G. Parrish, H. Wyckoff,
and D. C. Phillips, Nature 181, 662 EP (1958).
5 R. E. Franklin and R. G. Gosling, Nature 171, 740 EP (1953).
6 J. D. Watson and F. H. C. Crick, Nature 171, 737 EP (1953).
7 J. Chipman, Metallurgical and Materials Transactions B 3, 55
(1972).
8 C. M. Song, S. J. Lim, and J. C. Tong, Brieﬁngs in Bioinformatics
10, 579 (2009).
9 V. Stanev, C. Oses, A. G. Kusne, E. Rodriguez, J. Paglione,
S. Curtarolo, and I. Takeuchi, npj Computational Materials 4, 29
(2018).
10 Y. Zhang, A. Mesaros, K. Fujita, S. Edkins, M. Hamidian,
K. Ch’ng, H. Eisaki, S. Uchida, J. Davis, E. Khatami, et al., arXiv
preprint arXiv:1808.00479 (2018).
11 G. Pilania, A. Mannodi-Kanakkithodi, B. Uberuaga, R. Ram-
prasad, J. Gubernatis,
and T. Lookman, Scientiﬁc Reports 6,
19375 (2016).
12 O. Isayev, C. Oses, C. Toher, E. Gossett, S. Curtarolo,
and
A. Tropsha, Nature Communications 8, 15679 (2017).
13 A. Seko, T. Maekawa, K. Tsuda, and I. Tanaka, Physical Review
B 89, 054303 (2014).
14 P. V. Balachandran, J. Theiler, J. M. Rondinelli, and T. Lookman,
Scientiﬁc Reports 5, 13285 (2015).
15 G. Carleo and M. Troyer, Science 355, 602 (2017).
16 K. Ch’ng, J. Carrasquilla, R. G. Melko, and E. Khatami, Physical
Review X 7, 031038 (2017).
17 E. P. Van Nieuwenburg, Y.-H. Liu,
and S. D. Huber, Nature
Physics 13, 435 (2017).
18 J. Carrasquilla and R. G. Melko, Nature Physics 13, 431 (2017).
19 G. Torlai and R. G. Melko, Physical Review Letters 119, 030501
(2017).
20 P. B. Wigley, P. J. Everitt, A. van den Hengel, J. Bastian, M. A.
Sooriyabandara, G. D. McDonald, K. S. Hardman, C. Quinlivan,
P. Manju, C. C. Kuhn, et al., Scientiﬁc Reports 6, 25890 (2016).
21 P. Baldi, P. Sadowski, and D. Whiteson, Nature Communications
5, 4308 (2014).
22 F. Schindler, N. Regnault, and T. Neupert, Physical Review B 95,
245134 (2017).
23 W. B. Park, J. Chung, J. Jung, K. Sohn, S. P. Singh, M. Pyo,
N. Shin, and K.-S. Sohn, IUCrJ 4, 486 (2017).
24 D. Silver, T. Hubert, J. Schrittwieser, I. Antonoglou, M. Lai,
A. Guez, M. Lanctot, L. Sifre, D. Kumaran, T. Graepel, T. Lil-
licrap, K. Simonyan, and D. Hassabis, Science 362, 1140 (2018),
http://science.sciencemag.org/content/362/6419/1140.full.pdf.
25 A. Ziletti, D. Kumar, M. Schefﬂer, and L. M. Ghiringhelli, Nature
Communications 9, 2775 (2018).
26 G. Bergerhoff, I. Brown, F. Allen, et al., International Union of
Crystallography, Chester 360, 77 (1987).
27 R. T. Downs and M. Hall-Wallace, American Mineralogist 88, 247
(2003).
28 S. Graˇzulis, D. Chateigner, R. T. Downs, A. F. T. Yokochi,
M. Quir´os, L. Lutterotti, E. Manakova, J. Butkus, P. Moeck, and
A. Le Bail, Journal of Applied Crystallography 42, 726 (2009).
29 S. Graˇzulis, A. Dakevi, A. Merkys, D. Chateigner, L. Lut-
terotti, M. Quirs, N. R. Serebryanaya, P. Moeck, R. T. Downs,
and A. Le Bail, Nucleic Acids Research 40, D420 (2012),
http://nar.oxfordjournals.org/content/40/D1/D420.full.pdf+html.
30 A. Merkys, A. Vaitkus, J. Butkus, M. Okuli-Kazarinas, V. Kairys,
and S. Graˇzulis, Journal of Applied Crystallography 49 (2016),
10.1107/S1600576715022396.
31 S. Graˇzulis, A. Merkys, A. Vaitkus,
and M. Okuli-Kazarinas,
Journal of Applied Crystallography 48, 85 (2015).
32 A. Jain, S. P. Ong, G. Hautier, W. Chen, W. D. Richards, S. Dacek,
S. Cholia, D. Gunter, D. Skinner, G. Ceder, and K. A. Persson,
APL Materials 1, 011002 (2013).
33 B. Lafuente, R. Downs, H. Yang,
and N. Stone, “The power
of databases: The rruff project,” in Highlights in Mineralogical
Crystallography (Walter de Gruyter GmbH, 2016) pp. 1–29.
34 P.-E. Werner, L. Eriksson, and M. Westdahl, Journal of Applied
Crystallography 18, 367 (1985).
35 J. Visser, Journal of Applied Crystallography 2, 89 (1969).
36 A. Boultif and D. Lou¨er, Journal of Applied Crystallography 24,
987 (1991).
37 A. Le Bail, Powder Diffraction 19, 249 (2004).
38 A. Altomare, M. Camalli, C. Cuocci, C. Giacovazzo, A. Moliterni,
and R. Rizzi, Journal of Applied Crystallography 42, 1197 (2009).
39 M. A. Neumann, Journal of Applied Crystallography 36, 356
(2003).
40 I. Goodfellow, Y. Bengio, and A. Courville, Deep Learning (MIT
Press, 2016) http://www.deeplearningbook.org.
41 D. Kingma and J. Ba, International Conference on Learning Rep-
resentations (2014).
42 S. P. Ong, W. D. Richards, A. Jain, G. Hautier, M. Kocher, S. Cho-
lia, D. Gunter, V. L. Chevrier, K. A. Persson, and G. Ceder, Com-
putational Materials Science 68, 314 (2013).
43 F. Chollet et al., “Keras,” (2015).
44 M. Abadi, A. Agarwal, P. Barham, E. Brevdo, Z. Chen, C. Citro,
G. S. Corrado, A. Davis, J. Dean, M. Devin, S. Ghemawat,
I. Goodfellow, A. Harp, G. Irving, M. Isard, Y. Jia, R. Jozefow-
icz, L. Kaiser, M. Kudlur, J. Levenberg, D. Man´e, R. Monga,
S. Moore, D. Murray, C. Olah, M. Schuster, J. Shlens, B. Steiner,
I. Sutskever, K. Talwar, P. Tucker, V. Vanhoucke, V. Vasudevan,
F. Vi´egas, O. Vinyals, P. Warden, M. Wattenberg, M. Wicke,

9
Y. Yu, and X. Zheng, “TensorFlow: Large-scale machine learn-
ing on heterogeneous systems,” (2015), software available from
tensorﬂow.org.
