1 
 
Fast and interpretable classification of small X-ray diffraction datasets using 
data augmentation and deep neural networks 
 
Authors: Felipe Oviedo1*&, Zekun Ren2*, Shijing Sun1, Charles Settens1, Zhe Liu1, Noor Titan Putri 
Hartono1, Ramasamy Savitha3, Brian L. DeCost4, Siyu I.P. Tian1, Giuseppe Romano1, Aaron Gilad 
Kusne4, and Tonio Buonassisi1,2 
 
1Massachusetts Institute of Technology, Cambridge, MA 02139, USA 
2Singapore-MIT Alliance for Research and Technology, 138602 Singapore. 
3Institute for Infocomm Research (I2R), Agency for Science, Technology and Research (A*STAR), 
138632, Singapore. 
4National Institute of Standards and Technology, MS 8520, Gaithersburg, MD 20899, USA. 
& Corresponding authors:  
Felipe Oviedo 
77 Massachusetts Av., Bldg. 
35-135, Cambridge MA 
02139 
+1-617-642-1529 
foviedo@mit.edu 
Zekun Ren 
Singapore-MIT Alliance for 
Research and Technology, 
138602 Singapore 
+65-6516-8603 
zekun@smart.mit.edu 
Tonio Buonassisi 
77 Massachusetts Av., Bldg. 
35-213, Cambridge MA 
02139 
+1-617-324-5130 
buonassisi@mit.edu 
 
*These authors contributed equally to this work 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

2 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

3 
 
Abstract 
 
X-ray diffraction (XRD) data acquisition and analysis is among the most time-consuming steps in 
the development cycle of novel thin-film materials. We propose a machine-learning-enabled 
approach to predict crystallographic dimensionality and space group from a limited number of 
thin-film XRD patterns. We overcome the scarce-data problem intrinsic to novel materials 
development by coupling a supervised machine learning approach with a model-agnostic, 
physics-informed data augmentation strategy using simulated data from the Inorganic Crystal 
Structure Database (ICSD) and experimental data. As a test case, 115 thin-film metal-halides 
spanning 3 dimensionalities and 7 space-groups are synthesized and classified. After testing 
various algorithms, we develop and implement an all convolutional neural network, with 
cross-validated accuracies for dimensionality and space-group classification of 93% and 89%, 
respectively. We propose average class activation maps, computed from a global average 
pooling layer, to allow high model interpretability by human experimentalists, elucidating the 
root-causes of misclassification. Finally, we systematically evaluate the maximum XRD pattern 
step size (data acquisition rate) before loss of predictive accuracy occurs, and determine it to be 
0.16° 2, which enables an XRD pattern to be obtained and classified in 5.5 minutes or less. 
 
Keywords: X-ray diffraction, novel materials, thin-films, machine learning, data augmentation, 
crystallography, interpretable machine learning 
 
 

4 
 
I. Introduction 
 
High-throughput material synthesis and rapid characterization are necessary ingredients for 
inverse design and accelerated material discovery 1,2. X-ray diffraction (XRD) is a workhorse 
technique to determine crystallography and phase information, including lattice parameters, 
crystal symmetry, phase composition, density, space-group, and dimensionality 3. This is 
achieved by comparing XRD patterns for a novel material to the measured or simulated XRD 
patterns of known materials 4. Despite its indispensable utility, XRD is a common bottleneck in 
materials characterization and screening loops: one hour is typically required for thin-film XRD 
data acquisition for a 2  scan with high angular resolution, and another one to two hours are 
typically required for Rietveld refinement by an expert crystallographer, assuming the possible 
crystalline phases are known. It is widely recognized that machine learning methods have 
potential to accelerate this process; however, practical implementations have thus far focused 
on well-established materials 5–7, require combinatorial datasets spanning among various 
phases 8,9 , or require large datasets 5,10, while material screening using the inverse design 
paradigm often involves less-studied materials, spanning multiple classes of with different 
material / phase compositions, and smaller data sets  prototypes.  
 
Typically, experimental XRD pattern data is analyzed by obtaining descriptors such as peak 
shape, height and position. Matching descriptors of the test pattern to known XRD patterns in 
crystalline databases allows the identification of the compound of interest4. Refinement 
methods such as Rietveld refinement and Pawley refinement have been used for decades to 

5 
 
analyze experimental XRD patterns4. For novel compounds in thin-film form, however, the use 
of Rietveld refinement is limited due to the lack of reference patterns in the database as well as 
unknown film textures. The direct-space method, statistical methods, and the growth of single 
crystals have been used to obtain crystal symmetry information for novel materials 7,11–14, but 
the significant iteration time, feature engineering, human expertise, and knowledge of specific 
material required makes these methods impractical for high-throughput experimentation, 
where sample characterization rates are of the order of one material per minute or faster 2,15, 
explored over various material families. 
 
An alternative approach consists in using machine learning methods to obtain more robust 
spectral descriptors and quickly classify crystalline structure based on the peak location and 
shape in the XRD pattern. Breakthrough methods have been developed for the similar problem 
of phase attribution in combinatorial alloys16,17, but only few studies have been developed for 
solution-processed  material screening, such as perovskite screening, where phase attribution is 
usually not as important as correct classification of materials into groups according to crystal 
parameters.  The most successful methods 10,18 for material screening use convolutional neural 
networks (CNN) trained with hundreds of thousands of XRD powder patterns simulated with 
data from the Inorganic Crystalline Structure Database (ICSD). Further CNN and other deep 
learning algorithms have been employed to obtain crystalline information for other kinds of 
diffraction data 19–21. In a couple studies, noise-based data augmentation, a common technique 
of image preprocessing for machine learning, has been used to avoid overfitting in a broader 
kind of X-ray characterization problems 20,22,23 and more broadly in other fields such as TEM 

6 
 
imaging 21, however the augmentation procedure has not been based in physical knowledge of 
actual experimental samples. Furthermore, the machine learning methods developed up to 
date for XRD analysis do not allow any kind of interpretation by the experimentalists10, 
hindering improvements of experimental design. 
 
While similar approaches produce good results for crystal structure classification, we have 
found that applying them to high-throughput characterization of novel solution-processed 
compounds is generally not practical, given the limited access to large datasets of clean, 
pre-processed, relevant, XRD spectra. Furthermore, most materials of interest developed in 
high-throughput synthesis loops are thin-film materials. The preferred orientation of the 
crystalline planes in thin-films causes their experimental XRD patterns to differ from the 
thousands of simulated XRD powder patterns available in most databases 24,25. Thin-film 
compounds usually will present spectrum shifting and periodic scaling of peaks in preferred 
orientations, reducing the accuracy of machine learning models trained with powder data 8,9,26, 
even in the cases when noise-based data augmentation techniques are used. 18 
 
Considering these challenges, we propose a supervised machine learning framework for rapid 
crystal structure identification of novel materials from thin-film XRD measurements. For this 
work, we created a library of 164 XRD patterns of thin-film halide materials extracted from the 
>100,000 compounds available in the ICSD 27; these 164 XRD patterns include lead-halide 
perovskite28,29 and lead-free perovskite-inspired materials 30. These XRD patterns were 
manually classified among different crystal dimensionalities using ICSD information. Based on 

7 
 
this small dataset of relevant XRD powder patterns extracted from the ICSD and an additional 
115 experimental XRD patterns, we propose a model-agnostic, physics-informed data 
augmentation to generate a suitable and robust training dataset for thin-film materials, and 
subsequently test the space-group and dimensionality classification accuracy of multiple 
machine learning algorithms. A one-dimensional implementation of an “all convolutional neural 
network”31 is proposed, implemented and identified as the most accurate and interpretable 
classifier for this problem.  We propose a way to use class activation maps32, computed from 
the weight distribution of a global average pooling layer and adapted to the context of our 
problem, to provide interpretability of classification success or failure pattern  for the 
experimentalist.  Subsequently, the effect of the augmented dataset size and the XRD pattern 
granularity is investigated. Our proposed methodology could be applied to other crystal 
descriptors of thin-film materials, such as lattice parameter or atomic coordinates, as long as 
labelled information is available. 
 
Our contributions can be summarized as: a) Development of physics-informed data 
augmentation for thin-film XRD, which successfully addresses the sparse / scarce data problem, 
breaching the gap between the thousands of XRD patterns in crystalline databases and real 
thin-film materials, b) Development of highly interpretable, highly-accurate, all convolutional 
neural network for XRD material screening, c) Proposal of Average Class Activation Maps as a 
feasible interpretability tool in convolutional neural networks trained on spectral data. 
 
 

8 
 
II. Results and Discussion 
Framework for rapid XRD classification 
The framework developed for rapid classification of XRD thin-film patterns according to crystal 
descriptors is shown in Figure 1a. The methodology makes use of both experimental and 
simulated XRD patterns to train a machine learning classification algorithm. A simulated dataset 
is defined by extracting crystal structure information from the ICSD. The experimental dataset 
consists of a set of synthesized samples, which are manually labelled for training and testing 
purposes. The datasets are subjected to data augmentation based on the three spectral 
transformations shown in Figure 2. 
 
The crystal descriptors of interest, space-group and crystal dimensionality, are chosen because 
of their importance for material screening in accelerated material development. In many 
inorganic material systems, the crystalline dimensionality — i.e., a generalization of the 
crystalline symmetry into 0-dimensional (0D), 1D, 2D or 3D symmetry— constitutes a figure of 
merit for experimental material screening as it correlates with observed charge-transport 
properties.33 In perovskites and perovskites-inspired materials, for instance, 3D crystalline 
structures have been shown to have good carrier-transport properties for solar cells and LED 
applications,33,34  while 3D-2D mixtures have been found to have greater stability in lead halide 
perovskites than pure-phase 3D crystals.35 With further detail, the space-group number 
describes the standardized symmetry group of a configuration in space, classifying crystal 
symmetries into 230 groups. Identifying the space-group number of a sample provides crystal 
information beyond dimensionality, including atomic bonding angles and relative distances, 

9 
 
which are believed to be of importance for predicting material properties 36. In this specific 
study, the framework relies on the relation between XRD patterns and the crystal descriptors of 
interest. For example, among perovskite-inspired materials for photovoltaic applications, 3D 
cubic lead halide perovskites of multiple compositions show distinct features in the XRD pattern 
compared to 2D layered bismuth perovskites 37,38.   
 
Typically, the powder XRD pattern is used to identify space-group through Rietveld refinement, 
but the compression of crystalline three-dimensional crystallographic information into a one-
dimensional diffraction pattern causes the space-group to be impossible to determine 
unambiguously in certain low-symmetry phases, independently of the measurement technique 
39. In this work, the space-groups of interest are able to be determined from XRD information 
only. 
 
To better account for noise measurement and the physical difference between 
randomly-oriented powder patterns and experimental thin-film patterns, the patterns were 
subjected to a process of data augmentation based on domain knowledge. Subsequently, both 
augmented experimental and simulated XRD pattern datasets are used for testing, training and 
cross-validation of machine learning algorithms.  
 
Figure 1b shows the architecture of the final all convolutional network, which is proposed and 
identified as the best performing machine learning algorithm in subsequent sections. 
 

10 
 
 Experimental measurement and labelling of XRD patterns 
The experimental dataset consists of 75 XRD patterns for dimensionality classification, 
summarized in Table S1 in the Supplementary Information, and 88 XRD patterns for space-
group classification, summarized in Table S2. A total of 115 unique labelled XRD patterns are 
considered among both datasets. For this work, perovskite-inspired 3D materials based on lead 
halide perovskites (space-group 𝑃𝑚3̅𝑚), tin halide perovskite (𝐼4/𝑚𝑐𝑚), cesium silver bismuth 
bromide double perovskite (𝐹𝑚3̅𝑚), bismuth and antimony halide 2D (𝑃3̅𝑚1, 𝑃𝑐, 𝑃21/𝑎) and 
0D (𝑃63/𝑚𝑚𝑐) perovskite-inspired materials are synthesized and used as training and testing 
dataset. The details of the synthesis and characterization methodology are described in great 
detail in our experimental study 40.  Figure S1 in the Supplementary Information shows the 
t-SNE representation of the XRD patterns labelled with dimensionality and space-group, 
providing evidence of the complexity of the classification problem. 
 
Rietveld refinement is restricted in this case due to the unknown preferred orientation and 
texture of the thin-film samples. In consequence, the XRD patterns are subjected to peak 
indexing and the dimensionality and space-group are confirmed based on ICSD data, for those 
cases when reference patterns are available in the dataset. 
 
Data mining and simulation of XRD patterns 
The simulated training dataset consists of 164 compounds extracted from ICSD with a similar 
composition, expected crystal symmetry, and space-group as the synthesized materials of 
interest. All the possible single, double, ternary, and quaternary combinations of the elements 

11 
 
of interest were extracted during database mining. The compositions of all the materials of 
interest along with the labelled dimensionality and space-group information is available in 
Table S3. The fundamental crystal descriptors extracted from the material database are used to 
simulate XRD powder patterns with random crystalline orientations, as explained in the 
Methods section. 
 
Data Augmentation based on domain knowledge 
Experimental thin-film XRD patterns vary greatly compared to simulated, idealized, 
randomly-oriented XRD patterns. Due to expansions and contractions in the crystalline lattice, 
XRD peaks shift along the 2ϴ axis according to the specific size and location of the different 
elements present in  a compound, while maintaining similar periodicity based on crystal space-
group3  8,26,41. In addition, for thin-film samples, the XRD pattern can be shifted due to strain in 
the film induced during the fabrication process 42. Polycrystalline thin-films are also known to 
have preferred orientations along certain crystallographic planes. The preferred orientation is 
influenced by the crystal growth process and substrate 43, and is common for most 
solution-processing and vapor-deposition fabrication methods. Ideal random powders contain 
multiple grains without any preferred global orientations, thus all crystallographic orientations 
are represented evenly in the peak intensity and periodicity of the XRD pattern. As a 
consequence of their preferred orientations along crystallographic planes, thin-film XRD 
relative peak intensities are scaled up periodically in the preferred plane orientation, and scaled 
down periodically or even eliminated in the non-preferred orientations. 
 

12 
 
To increase the size and robustness of the limited training dataset and to account for these 
fundamental differences between real thin-films and simulated XRD powder spectra, we perform 
a three-step data augmentation procedure based on physical domain knowledge:  
 
1. Peak scaling, 2. Peak elimination and 3. Pattern shifting. These are transformation are 
described in detail in Methods. Figure 2 summarize the data augmentation steps and its effects 
on a representative pattern. Given random variables S and 𝜀 in Eqs. 1–3 in the Methods section, 
2,000 patterns are augmented from the simulated dataset, and 2,000 patterns are augmented 
from experimentally measured spectra. 
 
We choose to perform physics-informed data augmentation instead of explicit regularization for 
the following reasons: 1. Data augmentation has been found to be more robust at avoiding 
overfitting than explicit regularization when using neural networks44, 2. Data augmentation is 
model-agnostic, allowing our approach to successfully bridge the gap between experimental XRD 
patterns and thousands of XRD patterns available in databases without depending on a specific 
model that might not generalize well in all cases (no-free-lunch theorem), and 3. 
Physics-informed data augmentation allows high interpretability, and is found to be more robust 
than traditional noise-based augmentation approaches (Table S6). 
 
Classification results and All Convolutional Neural Network 
Pre-processed, augmented experimental data and augmented simulated data are fed into 
various supervised machine learning algorithms for training and testing purposes. The 

13 
 
best-performing algorithm is evaluated. The XRD patterns are classified into 3 crystal 
dimensionalities (0D, 2D, and 3D) and 7 space-groups (𝑃𝑚3̅𝑚, 𝐼4/𝑚𝑐𝑚, 𝐹𝑚3̅𝑚, 𝑃3̅𝑚1, 𝑃𝑐, 
𝑃21/𝑎, 𝑃63/𝑚𝑚𝑐). 
 
For this purpose, we represent the XRD pattern as either a vector or a time series. For each kind 
of data representation, different classification algorithms are considered. Using a vector 
representation of the XRD pattern, the following classification methods are tested: Naïve Bayes, 
k-Nearest Neighbors, Logistic Regression, Random Forest, Decision Trees, Support Vector 
Machine, Gradient Boosting Decision Trees, a Fully-Connected Deep Neural Network, and an 
All Convolutional Neural Network with a global pooling layer45–47. The XRD patterns are also 
analyzed as a time-series with a normalized Dynamic Time Warping (DTW) distance metric48 
combined with a k-Nearest Neighbors classification algorithm, which was found in literature as 
the most adequate metric for measuring similarity among metal-alloy XRD spectra7,26.  
 
The problem of novel material development is inherently a multi-class classification problem, in 
which the classes for training and testing purposes can often be imbalanced as some material 
families are better characterized than others (e.g., lead-based perovskites are better 
represented in material databases than newer lead-free perovskites)38. Common metrics for 
binary classification such as accuracy might not be the most adequate in this context 46. The 
final choice for adequate metrics depends on the relative importance of false positive and false 
negatives in minority and majority classes, according to the goals of the experimentalist. For 
method development in this work, we consider the following metrics: subset accuracy, defined 

14 
 
as the number of correctly classified patterns among all test patterns, and F1 score. F1 score in 
this problem can be interpreted as the weighted harmonic mean of precision and recall; the 
closer it is to 1.0, the higher the classifier’s precision and recall46.  Intuitively, precision is the 
ability of the classifier not to produce a false positive, whereas recall is the ability of a classifier 
to find all the true positives. An F1 metric is calculated for each class label, and it is combined 
into an overall score by taking either the micro or the macro average of the individual scores. 
The macro average calculates the mean of the metrics of all the individual classes, hence 
treating all classes equally. The micro average adds the individual contribution of all samples to 
compute the overall metric.  
 
When there is class imbalance, accuracy and F1 micro score characterize the classifier’s 
performance over all classes, whereas F1 macro emphasizes the accuracy on infrequent 
classes46. Thus, a natural choice for high-throughput experiments across multiple material 
classes seems to be accuracy / F1 micro score, except in those cases when we are especially 
interested in analyzing an infrequent material class, being F1 macro a more representative 
metric in that case. In this work, we choose to report the classification accuracy and both F1 
micro and F1 macro, while recall and precision results are included in the Supplementary 
Information (Table S4 and Table S5). 
 
We measure the performance of the dimensionality and space-group classification methods 
based on three different approaches of splitting the training and testing datasets: 
 

15 
 
Case 1: Exclusively simulated XRD patterns are used for testing and training. 5-fold cross 
validation is performed. 
Case 2: The simulated XRD patterns are used for training, and the experimental patterns for 
known materials are used for testing. 
Case 3: All of the simulated data and 80% of the experimental data are used for training, and 20% 
of the experimental data are used for testing. 5-fold cross validation is performed. 
 
Each one of the training/testing cases mentioned earlier are tested for crystal dimensionality 
and space-group prediction accuracy and micro/macro F1 score. The results are reported in 
Table 1. In each cell, the crystal dimensionality classification metric is reported first, followed by 
the metric for space-group classification. Case 1, presenting 5-fold cross validation results of the 
simulated dataset, has the highest accuracy as it does not predict any experimental data and 
thus is free of experimental errors for both crystal descriptors. Case 2 performs the 
experimental prediction solely based on simulated patterns, thus having the lowest accuracy. 
Finally, Case 3 has a significant higher accuracy than Case 2 for both crystal dimensionality and 
space-group prediction. F1 scores follow these trends as well. 
 
In general, the model’s accuracy and F1 score is lower for space-group classification than that 
for crystal dimensionality classification. This discrepancy is caused by the lower number of 
per-class labelled examples for space-group classification compared to crystal dimensionality 
classes. Class imbalance can also systematically affect the training performance of the classifier, 
to avoid this issue, we performed an oversampling test with synthetic training data according to 

16 
 
49,50, and observed little discrepancy of accuracy between the balanced and imbalanced 
datasets after 5-fold cross validation. 
 
The use of experimental data as part of the training set increases the model’s accuracy and 
robustness. This fact can be explained by the high variability of experimental thin-film XRD 
patterns, even after data pre-processing. The relatively high accuracy with the relatively small 
number of experimental samples (on the order of 10–102) confirms the potential of our data 
augmentation strategy to yield high predictive accuracies even with small datasets. Table S6 in 
the SI compares our strategy to traditional noise-based augmentation approaches, and shows 
an average increase of classification accuracy of more than 12% absolute. 
 
Naturally, the F1 macro score is systematically lower than the F1 micro score, reflecting the 
impact of misclassification of those dimensionality and space-group classes with less training 
examples. However, the F1 macro score is still fairly high for most classifiers. This fact reflects 
the importance of adequate experimental design to achieve good generalization among classes. 
 
For all three test cases, the all convolutional neural network (a-CNN) classifier performs better 
than any other classification technique. The 1-dimensional a-CNN architecture implemented is 
composed of three 1-dimensional convolutional layers, with 32 filters each, and strides and 
kernel size of 8, 5 and 3 units respectively. The activation function between layers is ReLu. A 
global average pooling layer51 (acting as a weak regularizer) and a final dense layer with 
softmax activation is used. The loss function minimized is binary cross entropy. We use early 

17 
 
stopping with a batch size of 128 during training, and use the Adam optimizer algorithm to 
minimize the loss function. The CNN is implemented in Keras 2.2.1 with the Tensorflow 
background. Figure 1b) contains a schematic of the proposed a-CNN architecture. 
 
Our a-CNN architecture, in contrast with other convolutional neural networks, does not have a 
max pooling layers in between convolutional layers, and also lack of a set of dense layers in the 
final softmax classification layer. These modifications, in contrast with the architectures used in 
10,18, significantly reduces the number of parameters in the neural network and allows faster 
and simpler training, and are less prone to overfitting. Another advantage of our 
implementation is the possibility to extract class activation maps using global average pooling 
layer. This, properly adapted to our problem context, allows us to visualize how the classified 
XRD patterns correspond to weights distribution in the last convolutional layer. The results are 
further discussed in the interpretability subsection.  
 
The a-CNN trained after data augmentation has an accuracy of more than 93% and 89% for 
crystal dimensionality and space-group classifications, respectively. As far as we know, the 
accuracy is the higher up to date based on results found in literature for space-group 
classification algorithms trained with thousands of ICSD patterns and manual labelling by 
human experts 10,52, and is also comparable to similar approaches in other kinds of diffraction 
data 8,19.  The neural network seems to be the most adequate method for high-throughput 
synthesis and characterization loops, as it also performs relatively well in terms of algorithm 
speed and in conditions of class imbalance. In the future, our methodology can be extended to 

18 
 
other materials systems, and may include other crystal descriptors as predicted outputs, such 
as lattice parameters and atomic coordinates.  
 
Furthermore, the a-CNN performs better than the traditional k-nearest neighbors method using 
DTW. In our test case and dataset, the differences between thin-film and powder spectra seem 
not to be captured properly by DTW alone. Arguably, DTW could be more useful if a larger XRD 
thin-film pattern dataset is available for k-Nearest Neighbors classification, or if it exists greater 
similarity between XRD patterns of the same class, allowing the DTW warping path to be better 
captured within the DTW window under consideration 26.  Convolutional neural networks have 
been found to perform better than DTW for classification of time-series, which is consistent 
with our results53. 
 
Effect of augmented dataset size: 
The size of the dataset is critical for obtaining a high accuracy and F1 score. To explore the 
effect of augmented dataset size, the a-CNN accuracy was computed for various combinations 
of augmented experimental (i.e., number of augmented XRD spectra originated from the 88 
measured spectra, varying S and 𝜀 in Eqs. 1–3) and augmented simulated dataset sizes (i.e., 
number of augmented XRD spectra originating from the 164 simulated ICSD spectra). Figure 3a 
and Figure 3b summarize this sensitivity analysis for Case 3 training/testing conditions for 
dimensionality and space-group classification. Twenty different five-fold cross-validation runs 
were performed to calculate the 1-standard-deviation error bars for each data point. 
 

19 
 
In general, as the size of the experimental and augmented datasets increase, the mean 
accuracy quickly approaches the asymptotic accuracy reported in Table 1. This trend reaffirms 
and quantifies the importance of data augmentation for the predictive accuracy of our model.  
The critical augmented-dataset size seems to be around 700 augmented spectra. The model’s 
accuracy is more sensitive to the augmented experimental dataset size, likely because most of 
the dataset variance comes from the experimental XRD patterns. The data augmentation of the 
simulated dataset causes the accuracy to grow monotonically in Figure 3b; however, this trend 
is not satisfied in the case of Figure 3a, where no augmented simulated data seems on average 
to perform the best. We hypothesize that augmenting simulated data could actually introduce 
excessive noise to the model, hampering classification when the number of possible classes is 
small. 
 
Figure 3 illustrates that if no data augmentation is used (i.e., the origin, 0, 0), the predictive 
accuracy could be below 50% for space-group and below 70% for dimensionality. Our physics-
informed data augmentation directly increase accuracy by up to 23% in the case of 
dimensionality and 19% in the case of space-group classification.  This result reinforces the 
need for data augmentation for sparse datasets, as is typical with early-stage material 
development.  
 
Impact of data coarsening 
To evaluate trade-offs between ML classification accuracy and XRD acquisition speed, we 
investigate how data coarsening of the XRD pattern impacts the accuracy of ML algorithm 

20 
 
prediction. In Figure 4, we report Case 3 accuracy with increasing 2ϴ angle step size. The 
baseline step size of the 2ϴ scan in our XRD patterns is 0.04°. Data coarsening is performed by 
removing the data with different step size and rerunning the augmentation and classification 
algorithms. For crystal dimensionality and space-group classification, the highest accuracies are 
achieved at 0.04-0.08°, while 85%+ accuracy is achieved when the 2ϴ step-size is 0.16° or less 
for both cases. Using the larger step-size, the XRD pattern acquisition time can be reduced by 
75%, allowing the full spectra to be measured and classified in less than 5.5 minutes with our 
setup. 
 
Interpretability using Class Activation Maps: 
Class activation maps (CAM) are representations of the weights in the last layer of a 
convolutional neural network, before performing classification. A CAM for a certain class and 
pattern indicates the main discriminative regions (in our case, peak and series of peaks in the 
XRD pattern) that the network uses to identify that class32.  Details of the CAM computation are 
included in the Methods section.  
 
A similar approach has been followed to interpret and improve object recognition in images 
and videos using two-dimensional CNNs32. A single pattern or image produces a unique CAM 
revealing the main discriminative features. In addition, in the context of our problem, we 
propose to generalize CAMs to all training samples within a class by averaging over each of the 
computed CAM weights for the all training samples within a class, as explained in the Methods 
section. This averaging procedure is justified as the location and periodicity of discriminative 

21 
 
peaks within a class varies only slightly along all labelled samples in the training set, and can be 
extended to many spectral measurement techniques. This average CAM allows to visualize the 
main discriminative features of an XRD pattern used to classify testing data within a given class. 
 
By comparing the CAM for a single pattern to the average CAM for given class, we can to 
identify the root-causes of correct and incorrect classification by the a-CNN. Figure 5 illustrates 
this procedure for XRD patterns of space-group classes Class 2 (𝑃21/𝑎) and Class 6 (𝑃𝑚3̅𝑚). 
Figure 5a) and 5b) show the average CAM maps of Class 6 and Class 2 space-groups. Figure 5c) 
shows the CAM of an individual, correctly-classified XRD pattern. If we compare the individual 
CAM to Class 6 CAM, we can see that the neural network is identifying the same reference 
pattern as most of Class 6 samples, which translates into classification as Class 6. In contrast, 
Figure 5d) shows an incorrectly classified XRD pattern, which was determined to belong to Class 
6 by the CNN, when in reality it belongs to Class 2. A comparison of the individual CAM to the 
average CAMs of classes 6 and 2, show that the misclassified CAM is more similar to Figure 5a) 
than Figure 5b). A closer look to the misclassified patterns, shows that the periodicity of peaks 
before 30° and the relative lack of peaks between 30°-50° (likely caused by mixed phases), are 
causing the misclassification. 
 
Several representative misclassification cases are identified and included in the Section VII of 
the Supplementary Information. In our work, by comparing the CAM of wrongly classified cases 
to the average CAM of all training data within certain class, we conclude there are three main 
causes for failed classification. The first cause is the mixture of phases in the sample, which 

22 
 
increases the chance of the CAM of a particular pattern differing from the average class CAM. 
The second cause is lack of XRD patterns in the per-class training data. We only have less than 5 
patterns in certain space group classes, thus the average CAM of minority classes has only a 
limited number of discriminative features compared to majority classes, increasing the testing 
error. The third cause of misclassification is missing peaks, or too few peaks, present in the XRD 
pattern; becauseof the lack of discriminative features, the CAM of the incorrectly labelled 
pattern could be ambiguously similar to two or more average class CAMs, causing the 
misclassification. 
 
After the experimentalist identifies these root-causes of error, they can be mitigated by 
increasing the number of experimental training points for certain classes or increasing the 
phase purity of the material coming from the synthesis and solution processing procedure.  
 
Summary of contributions: 
In this work, we develop a supervised machine learning framework to screen novel materials 
based on the analysis of their XRD spectra. The framework is designed specifically for cases 
when only sparse datasets are available, e.g., early-stage high-throughput material 
development and discovery loops. Specifically, we propose a physics-informed data 
augmentation method that extends small, targeted experimental and simulated datasets, and 
captures the possible differences between simulated XRD powder patterns and experimental 
thin-film XRD patterns. A few thousand augmented spectra are found to increase our 
classification accuracy from <60% to 93% for dimensionality and 89% for space-group. The F1 

23 
 
macro score is also over 0.85 for various algorithms, reflecting the model’s capacity to deal with 
significantly imbalanced classes.  
 
When trained with both augmented simulated and experimental XRD spectra, all convolutional 
neural networks are found to have the highest accuracy / F1 macro score among the many 
supervised machine learning methods studied. Our proposed a-CNN architecture allows high 
performance and interpretably through class activation maps. The use of our proposed average 
class activation maps (average CAMs), allow to identify the root-cause of misclassification, and 
allow the design of a robust experiment. Furthermore, we find that the neural network model 
tolerates coarsening of the training data, providing future opportunities for online learning, i.e., 
the on-the-fly adaptive adjustment of XRD measurement parameters by taking feedback from 
machine learning algorithms 15.  
 
Our approach can be extended to XRD-based high throughput screening of any kind of thin-film 
materials, beyond perovskite and perovskite-inspired materials. Since most material databases 
lack information for various kinds of novel materials, the data augmentation approach to tackle 
data scarcity can be broadly applied. The underlying difference between XRD patterns of thin-
films and powders is common to a broad range of materials and is commonly seen in most thin-
film characterization experiments. The high interpretability of our approach could allow future 
work in semi-supervised or active learning, allowing the CAM maps to guide manual XRD 
refinement or actual XRD experiments. The framework may also be extended beyond XRD 
classification, to any spectrum containing information-rich features that require classification 

24 
 
(XPS, XRF, PL, mass spectroscopy, etc.). The advantages of our approach include: (1) 
interpretable error analysis; (2) a data-augmentation strategy that enables fast and accurate 
classification, even with small and imbalanced data sets. 
 
V. Methods 
Measurement and pre-processing of experimental XRD patterns 
The XRD patterns for each sample are obtained by using a parallel beam, X-ray powder 
diffraction Rigaku SmartLab system 54 with 2ϴ angle from 5-60° with a step size of 0.04°. The 
tool is configured in a symmetric setup. We preprocess the raw XRD patterns to reduce the 
experimental noise and the background signal. For this purpose, the background signal is 
estimated and subtracted along the 2ϴ axis, and the spectrum is smoothed conserving the peak 
width and relative peak size applying the Savitzky-Golay filter 55. A representative example of a 
preprocessed and raw XRD spectra is included in Figure S2 in the Supplementary Information. 
 
Simulation of powder XRD patterns  
The powder XRD simulations are carried out with Panalytical Highscore v4.7 software based on 
the Rietveld algorithm implementation by Hill and Howard 56,57. The XRD crystal is assumed to 
have fully random grain orientations. The unit cell lattice parameters, atomic coordinates, 
atomic displacement parameters, and space group information are considered for the structure 
factor calculation in the Rietveld model. 
 
Physics-informed data augmentation: 

25 
 
Suppose we describe the series of peaks in an XRD pattern by a discrete function (2𝛳): 𝐼⬚
⬚ ℝ+ , 
which maps a set of discrete angles 𝐼 to positive real numbers ℝ+ corresponding to peak 
intensities. We augment the data through the following sequential process of transformations 
𝛷𝑆,𝑐
1 , 𝛷𝑆
2 and 𝛷𝜀
3: 
 
1. Random peak scaling is applied periodically along the 2ϴ axis to account for different 
thin-film preferred orientations. A subset of random peaks at periodic angles 𝑆 is scaled 
by factor 𝑐, such that 
 
 
𝛷𝑆,𝑐
1 = 𝑐· 𝑓|𝑆+ 𝑓|𝐼\𝑆 
[Eq. 1]. 
 
2. Random peak elimination (with a different randomly-selected S than Eq. 1) is applied 
periodically along the 2ϴ axis, to account for different thin-film preferred orientations, 
such that 
 
 
𝛷𝑆
2 = 0 · 𝑓|𝑆+ 𝑓|𝐼\𝑆 
[Eq. 2]. 
 
3. Pattern shifting by small random value 𝜀 along the 2ϴ direction to allow for different 
material compositions and film strain conditions, such that 
 
 
𝛷𝜀
3 = 𝑓(2𝜃−𝜀) 
[Eq. 3]. 
 

26 
 
Class activation maps (CAMs): 
We perform global average pooling in the last convolutional layer. The pooling results are 
defined as ∑𝑓𝑘(𝑥)
𝑥
  where  𝑓𝑘(𝑥)  is the activation of unit 𝑘 at convolution location 𝑥. The 
pooling results ∑𝑓𝑘(𝑥)
𝑥
  are subsequently fed into the softmax classifier. The class 
confidence score, thus can be computed as: 
   
 
𝑆𝑐= ∑𝑤𝑘
𝐶
𝑘
∑𝑓𝑘(𝑥)
𝑥
= ∑∑𝑤𝑘
𝐶
𝑘
𝑓𝑘(𝑥)
𝑥
 
[Eq. 4]. 
 
 
We define 𝑀𝐶(𝑥) = ∑𝑤𝑘
𝐶𝑓𝑘(𝑥)
𝑘
, as the class activation map for class 𝐶, where 𝑤𝑘
𝐶 is the weight 
of unit k of the last convolution layer of class C. Therefore, 𝑆𝑐 can be rewritten as: 
 
𝑆𝑐= ∑𝑀𝐶(𝑥)
𝑥
  
[Eq. 5]. 
 
𝑀𝐶(𝑥) directly indicates the importance of the activation at the discrete location 𝑥 for a given 
XRD pattern in class 𝐶.  
In the context of XRD and other spectral measurements, the location of relevant intensity peaks 
is likely to be displaced only little from sample to sample within a certain class. Thus, the class 
activation maps for all samples within a class are similar, and could be averaged to obtain the 
discriminative features during activation. Thus, we can define average class activation maps for 
class C as 𝑀̅𝐶(𝑥): 
 
𝑀̅𝐶(𝑥) =
1
𝑛∑
𝑀𝐶𝑖(𝑥)
𝑛
𝑖=0 ∈𝐶
  
[Eq. 6]. 
,where  𝑛 corresponds to the training patterns labeled as class C. 

27 
 
 
Data availability 
The experimental dataset analyzed during the current study is available in the following GitHub 
repository: [https://github.com/PV-Lab/AUTO-XRD/tree/master/Datasets/Experimental]. 
The simulated and labelled data that support the findings of this study is available from the 
Inorganic Crystalline Structure Database (ICSD), but restrictions apply to the availability of these 
data, which were used under license for the current study, and so are not publicly available. Data 
are however available from the authors upon reasonable request and with permission of ICSD. 
The code used for pre-processing, data augmentation and classification is available at 
[https://github.com/PV-Lab/AUTO-XRD/]. The classification algorithms are implemented using 
scikit-learn 0.20 46 and the fastdtw python library. The a-CNN is implemented using Keras with 
the Tensorflow background.  
 
Acknowledgements and Funding: 
FengXia Wei (A*STAR), Jason Hattrick-Simpers (NIST), Max Hutchinson (Citrine Informatics), and 
Zachary T. Trautt (NIST) for helpful suggestions on our analysis. Prof. Juan Pablo Correa Baena at 
Georgia Tech for sharing various experimental XRD patterns. This work was supported by 
a TOTAL SA research grant funded through MITei (supporting the experimental XRD), the 
National Research Foundation (NRF), Singapore through the Singapore Massachusetts Institute 
of Technology (MIT) Alliance for Research and Technology’s Low Energy Electronic Systems 
research program (supporting the machine learning algorithm development), the Accelerated 
Materials Development for Manufacturing Program at A*STAR via the AME Programmatic Fund 

28 
 
by the Agency for Science, Technology and Research under Grant No. A1898b0043 (for 
ML algorithm error analysis), and by the U.S. Department of Energy under the Photovoltaic 
Research and Development program under Award DE-EE0007535 (for code framework 
development). This work made use of the CMSE at MIT, which is supported by NSF award DMR-
0819762. 
 
Competing Interests: 
The Authors declare no Competing Financial or Non-Financial Interests. 
 
Author Contributions 
FO and ZR contributed equally for this work. FO, ZR, SS, and TB conceived of the research. CS, 
FO, and SS prepared the simulated XRD data. ZR, FO, CS, BD, and AGK developed data 
augmentation. SS, NTPH, and CS collected the XRD data. FO, ZR, and GR developed and tested 
ML algorithms, with key intellectual contributions from RS, ZL, BDC, and AGK. FO and ZR 
implemented and tuned the final a-CNN architecture and adapted class activation maps to the 
context of the problem. FO, ZR, SIPT, and TB wrote the manuscript, with input from all 
co-authors. 
Additional Information 
Supplementary information accompanies the paper on the npj Computational Materials 
website. 
 
References: 
1. 
Tabor, A., Roch, D. & Saikin, L. Lawrence Berkeley National Laboratory Recent Work Title 
Accelerating the discovery of materials for clean energy in the era of smart automation 
Publication Date. (2018). doi:10.1038/s41578-018-0005-z 

29 
 
2. 
Correa-Baena, J.-P. et al. Accelerating Materials Development via Automation, Machine 
Learning, and High-Performance Computing. Joule 2, 1410–1420 (2018). 
3. 
Dinnebier, R. E. Powder diffraction : theory and practice. (RSC Publ, 2009). 
4. 
Rietveld, H. M. A profile refinement method for nuclear and magnetic structures. J. Appl. 
Crystallogr. 2, 65–71 (1969). 
5. 
Carr, D. A., Lach-hab, M., Yang, S., Vaisman, I. I. & Blaisten-Barojas, E. Machine learning 
approach for structure-based zeolite classification. Microporous Mesoporous Mater. 117, 
339–349 (2009). 
6. 
Baumes, L. A., Moliner, M., Nicoloyannis, N. & Corma, A. A reliable methodology for high 
throughput identification of a mixture of crystallographic phases from powder X-ray 
diffraction data. CrystEngComm 10, 1321–1324 (2008). 
7. 
Baumes, L. A., Moliner, M. & Corma, A. Design of a Full-profile-matching solution for 
high-throughput analysis of multiphase samples through powder X-ray diffraction. Chem. 
- A Eur. J. 15, 4258–4269 (2009). 
8. 
Stanev, V. et al. Unsupervised phase mapping of X-ray diffraction data by nonnegative 
matrix factorization integrated with custom clustering. npj Comput. Mater. 4, (2018). 
9. 
Kusne, A. G., Keller, D., Anderson, A., Zaban, A. & Takeuchi, I. High-throughput 
determination of structural phase diagram and constituent phases using GRENDEL. 
Nanotechnology 26, (2015). 
10. 
Park, W. B. et al. Classification of crystal structure using a convolutional neural network. 
IUCrJ 4, 486–494 (2017). 
11. 
Park, W. B., Singh, S. P., Yoon, C. & Sohn, K. S. Combinatorial chemistry of oxynitride 
phosphors and discovery of a novel phosphor for use in light emitting diodes, 
Ca<inf>1.5</inf>Ba <inf>0.5</inf>Si<inf>5</inf>N<inf>6</inf>O<inf>3</inf>:Eu2+. J. 
Mater. Chem. C 1, 1832–1839 (2013). 
12. 
Rybakov, V. B., Babaev, E. V., Pasichnichenko, K. Y. & Sonneveld, E. J. X-ray mapping in 
heterocyclic design: VI. X-ray diffraction study of 3-(isonicotinoyl)-2-oxooxazolo[3,2-
a]pyridine and the product of its hydrolysis. Crystallogr. Reports 47, 473–477 (2002). 
13. 
Hirosaki, N., Takeda, T., Funahashi, S. & Xie, R. J. Discovery of new nitridosilicate 
phosphors for solid state lighting by the single-particle-diagnosis approach. Chem. Mater. 
26, 4280–4288 (2014). 
14. 
Suram, S. K. et al. Automated phase mapping with AgileFD and its application to light 
absorber discovery in the V-Mn-Nb oxide system. ACS Comb. Sci. 19, 37–46 (2017). 
15. 
Ren, F. et al. Accelerated discovery of metallic glasses through iteration of machine 
learning and high-throughput experiments. Sci. Adv. 4, (2018). 
16. 
Bunn, J. K. et al. Generalized machine learning technique for automatic phase attribution 
in time variant high-throughput experimental studies. J. Mater. Res. 30, 879–889 (2015). 
17. 
Kusne, A. G. et al. On-the-fly machine-learning for high-throughput experiments: Search 
for rare-earth-free permanent magnets. Sci. Rep. 4, 1–7 (2014). 
18. 
Vecsei, P. M., Choo, K., Chang, J. & Neupert, T. Neural Network-based Classification of 
Crystal Symmetries from X-Ray Diffraction Patterns. 1–9 (2018). 
19. 
Ziletti, A., Kumar, D., Scheffler, M. & Ghiringhelli, L. M. Insightful classification of crystal 
structures using deep learning. Nat. Commun. 9, 1–10 (2018). 
20. 
Ke, T. W. et al. A convolutional neural network-based screening tool for X-ray serial 

30 
 
crystallography. J. Synchrotron Radiat. 25, 655–670 (2018). 
21. 
Ziatdinov, M. et al. Deep Learning of Atomically Resolved Scanning Transmission Electron 
Microscopy Images: Chemical Identification and Tracking Local Transformations. ACS 
Nano 11, 12742–12752 (2017). 
22. 
Le Bras, R. et al. A Computational Challenge Problem in Materials Discovery: Synthetic 
Problem Generator and Real-World Datasets. Aaai 438–443 (2014). 
23. 
LeBras, R. et al. Constraint Reasoning and Kernel Clustering for Pattern Decomposition 
with Scaling. in Principles and Practice of Constraint Programming -- CP 2011 (ed. Lee, J.) 
508–522 (Springer Berlin Heidelberg, 2011). 
24. 
Järvinen, M. Application of symmetrized harmonics expansion to correction of the 
preferred orientation effect. J. Appl. Crystallogr. 26, 525–531 (1993). 
25. 
Fewster, P. F., Langford, J. I. & Fewster, P. F. Reports on Progress in Physics Related 
content X-ray analysis of thin films and multilayers. (1996). 
26. 
Iwasaki, Y., Kusne, A. G. & Takeuchi, I. Comparison of dissimilarity measures for cluster 
analysis of X-ray diffraction data from combinatorial libraries. npj Comput. Mater. 3, 1–8 
(2017). 
27. 
Belkly, A., Helderman, M., Karen, V. L. & Ulkch, P. New developments in the Inorganic 
Crystal Structure Database (ICSD): Accessibility in support of materials research and 
design. Acta Crystallogr. Sect. B Struct. Sci. 58, 364–369 (2002). 
28. 
Eperon, G. E. et al. Formamidinium lead trihalide: A broadly tunable perovskite for 
efficient planar heterojunction solar cells. Energy Environ. Sci. 7, 982–988 (2014). 
29. 
Lee, M. M., Teuscher, J., Miyasaka, T., Murakami, T. N. & Snaith, H. J. Efficient Hybrid 
Solar Cells Based on Meso-Superstructured Organometal Halide Perovskites. Science (80-. 
). 338, 643–647 (2012). 
30. 
Hoye, R. L. Z. et al. Perovskite-Inspired Photovoltaic Materials: Toward Best Practices in 
Materials Characterization and Calculations. Chem. Mater. 29, 1964–1988 (2017). 
31. 
Springenberg, J. T., Dosovitskiy, A., Brox, T. & Riedmiller, M. Striving for Simplicity: The All 
Convolutional Net. 1–14 (2014). doi:10.1163/_q3_SIM_00374 
32. 
Zhou, B., Khosla, A., Lapedriza, A., Oliva, A. & Torralba, A. Learning Deep Features for 
Discriminative Localization. (2015). doi:10.1109/CVPR.2016.319 
33. 
Etgar, L. The merit of perovskite’s dimensionality; Can this replace the 3D halide 
perovskite? Energy Environ. Sci. 11, 234–242 (2018). 
34. 
Xiao, Z., Meng, W., Wang, J., Mitzi, D. B. & Yan, Y. Searching for promising new 
perovskite-based photovoltaic absorbers: the importance of electronic dimensionality. 
Mater. Horiz. (2017). doi:10.1039/C6MH00519E 
35. 
Zhang, T., Long, M., Liu, P., Xie, W. & Xu, J.-B. Stable and Efficient 3D-2D Perovskite-
Perovskite Planar Heterojunction Solar Cell without Organic Hole Transport Layer. Joule 
(2018). doi:10.1016/j.joule.2018.09.022 
36. 
Kurchin, R. C., Gorai, P., Buonassisi, T. & Stevanović, V. Structural and Chemical Features 
Giving Rise to Defect Tolerance of Binary Semiconductors. Chem. Mater. 30, 5583–5592 
(2018). 
37. 
Baikie, T. et al. Synthesis and crystal chemistry of the hybrid perovskite (CH3NH3)PbI3 for 
solid-state sensitised solar cell applications. J. Mater. Chem. A 1, 5628–5641 (2013). 
38. 
Sun, S. et al. Synthesis, crystal structure, and properties of a perovskite-related bismuth 

31 
 
phase, (NH 4 ) 3 Bi 2 I 9. APL Mater. 4, 031101 (2016). 
39. 
Coelho, A. A. TOPAS-Academic, Version 6: Technical Reference. 208 (2016). 
40. 
Shijing Sun, Noor T. P. Hartono, Zekun D. Ren, Felipe Oviedo, Antonio M. Buscemi, 
Mariya Layurova, De Xin Chen, Tofunmi Ogunfunmi, Janak Thapa, Savitha Ramasamy, 
Charles Settens, Brian L. DeCost, Aaron Gilad Kusne, Zhe Liu, Siyu I. P. Tian, I. Marius 
Pete, T. B. Accelerating Photovoltaic Materials Development via High-Throughput 
Experiments and Machine-Learning-Assisted Diagnosis. Joule (2018). 
41. 
Ermon, S. et al. Pattern Decomposition with Complex Combinatorial Constraints: 
Application to Materials Discovery. (2014). doi:10.1890/03-0745 
42. 
Zhao, J. et al. Strained hybrid perovskite thin films and their impact on the intrinsic 
stability of perovskite solar cells. Sci. Adv. 3, eaao5616 (2017). 
43. 
Jarvinen, M. Application of symmetrized harmonics expansion to correction of the 
preferred orientation effect. J. Appl. Crystallogr. 26, 525–531 (1993). 
44. 
Hernández-García, A. & König, P. Data augmentation instead of explicit regularization. 
(2018). 
45. 
Goodfellow, I., Bengio, Y., Courville, A. & Bengio, Y. Deep learning. 1, (MIT press 
Cambridge, 2016). 
46. 
Pedregosa, F. et al. Scikit-learn: Machine Learning in {P}ython. J. Mach. Learn. Res. 12, 
2825–2830 (2011). 
47. 
Friedman, J., Hastie, T. & Tibshirani, R. The elements of statistical learning. 1, (Springer 
series in statistics New York, NY, USA:, 2001). 
48. 
Salvador, S. & Chan, P. FastDTW : Toward Accurate Dynamic Time Warping in Linear Time 
and Space. Time 11, 70–80 (2004). 
49. 
Haixiang, G. et al. Learning from class-imbalanced data: Review of methods and 
applications. Expert Syst. Appl. 73, 220–239 (2017). 
50. 
Chawla, N. V, Bowyer, K. W., Hall, L. O. & Kegelmeyer, W. P. SMOTE: synthetic minority 
over-sampling technique. J. Artif. Intell. Res. 16, 321–357 (2002). 
51. 
Lin, M., Chen, Q. & Yan, S. Network In Network. 1–10 (2013). 
doi:10.1109/ASRU.2015.7404828 
52. 
Yoon, C. H. et al. Unsupervised classification of single-particle X-ray diffraction snapshots 
by spectral clustering. Opt. Express 19, 16542 (2011). 
53. 
Wang, Z., Yan, W. & Oates, T. Time series classification from scratch with deep neural 
networks: A strong baseline. Proc. Int. Jt. Conf. Neural Networks 2017–May, 1578–1585 
(2017). 
54. 
Kobayashi, S. & Inaba, K. X-ray thin-film measurement techniques. mass Spectrosc. 
equipped with a Ski. interface 28, 8 (2012). 
55. 
Press, W. H. & Teukolsky, S. A. Savitzky-Golay Smoothing Filters. Comput. Phys. 4, 669 
(1990). 
56. 
Hill, R. J. & Howard, C. J. Quantitative phase analysis from neutron powder diffraction 
data using the Rietveld method. J. Appl. Crystallogr. 20, 467–474 (1987). 
57. 
Degen, T., Sadki, M., Bron, E., König, U. & Nénert, G. The HighScore suite. Powder Diffr. 
29, S13–S18 (2014). 
 
 

32 
 
 
 
 

33 
 
Figure Legends: 
 
Figure 1. General Framework and All Convolutional Neural Network Architecture: a) 
Schematic of our X-ray diffraction data classification framework, with physics-informed data 
augmentation. b) Schematic of the best performing algorithm, our All Convolutional Neural 
Network. 
 
Figure 2. Physics-informed Data Augmentation Algorithm: Schematic of the physics-informed 
data augmentation strategy, which accounts for the particularities of thin-film XRD spectra, as 
described in Eqs. 1–3. 
 
Figure 3. Accuracy of All Convolutional Neural Network with Augmented Data: Line plot 
showing mean Case 3 a-CNN accuracy, as a function of the number of augmented spectra 
(Methods, Eqs. 1–3) included in the training set, for a) dimensionality classification and b) 
space-group classification. The x-axis shows augmented experimental data (based on the 
original experimental XRD patterns), and the legend shows simulated data (based on the 164 
simulated powder-diffraction patterns obtained from the ICSD). The error bars correspond to 
one standard deviation from the mean. 
 
Figure 4. Reducing XRD Pattern Acquisition Time: Simulation of the trade-off between XRD 
pattern acquisition rate and predictive accuracy. Accuracies for crystal dimensionality and space 

34 
 
group predictions are estimated by coarsening the XRD spectrum 2ϴ step size for Case 3 
conditions. The error bars correspond to one standard deviation from the mean. 
Figure 5. Class Activation Maps For Misclassification Interpretability: Class activation maps 
(CAMs) generated by the a-CNN architecture, representing space-group classification of Class 2 
(𝑃21/𝑎) and Class 6 (𝑃𝑚3̅𝑚). Figures a) and b) correspond to maps generated by averaging all 
training samples in a certain class, while Figures c) and d) corresponds to the CAMs of correctly 
classified and incorrectly classified individual patterns, respectively. The correctly predicted 
pattern of  c) is explained by the similarity of its CAM to the average CAM of Class 6; whereas, 
the incorrectly prediction d) can be explained by comparing its CAM to the average CAMs of 
classes 2 and 6. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

35 
 
 
 
Figure 1. a) Schematic of our X-ray diffraction data classification framework, with 
physics-informed data augmentation. b) Schematic of the best performing algorithm, 
our All Convolutional Neural Network. 
 
 
 
 
 

36 
 
 
Figure 2. Schematic of the physics-informed data augmentation strategy accounts for the 
particularities of thin-film XRD spectra, as described in Eqs. 1–3. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

37 
 
 
Figure 3: Line plot showing mean Case 3 a-CNN accuracy, as a function of the number of 
augmented spectra (Methods, Eqs. 1–3) included in the training set. The x-axis shows 
augmented experimental data (based on the original experimental XRD patterns), and the 
legend shows simulated data (based on the 164 simulated powder-diffraction patterns 
obtained from the ICSD). The error bars correspond to one standard deviation from the mean. 
 
 

38 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 4: Simulation of the trade-off between XRD spectrum acquisition time and a-CNN 
prediction accuracy. Accuracies for crystal dimensionality and space group predictions are 
estimated by coarsening the XRD spectrum 2ϴ step size for Case 3 conditions. The error bars 
correspond to one standard deviation from the mean. 
 
 
 

39 
 
 
 
Figure 5: Class activation maps (CAMs) generated by the a-CNN architecture, representing 
space-group classification of Class 2 (P21/a) and Class 6 (𝑃𝑚3̅𝑚). Figures a) and b) correspond 
to maps generated by averaging all training samples in a certain class, while Figures c) and d) 
corresponds to the CAMs of correctly classified and incorrectly classified individual patterns, 
respectively. The correctly predicted pattern of  c) is explained by the similarity of its CAM to 
the average CAM of Class 6; whereas, the incorrectly prediction d) can be explained by 
comparing its CAM to the average CAMs of classes 2 and 6. 
 
